 
  
 
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA  
 
Proof Committee Hansard  
 
SENATE  
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  
 
Estimates  
 
 
(Public ) 
 
MONDAY, 3 JUNE 2024  
 
CANBERRA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BY AUTHORITY OF THE SENATE  
 
 
[PROOF COPY]  
  
CONDITIONS OF DISTRIBUTION  
This is an uncorrected proof of evidence taken before the committee.  
It is made available under the condition that it is recognised as such.   
 EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  
 
Monday, 3 June 2024  
 
Members in attendance:   Senators Allman -Payne, Cash, Colbeck, Cox, Davey, Grogan, O'Sullivan, Payman, 
Roberts, Sheldon, Tyrrell, Walsh, Waters and Watt . 
 
 WITNESSES  
 
  
EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS PORTFOLIO  
In Attendance  
Senator Watt, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Minister for Emergency Management  
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations  
Ms Natalie James , Secretary  
Corporate and Enabling Services  
Ms Deborah Jenkins, Deputy Secretary and Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Tim Ffrench, First Assistant Secretary and Chief Risk Officer, Legal and Assurance  
Mr Joseph (Ben) Sladic, First Assistant Secretary and Chief Financial Officer, Finance and Budget  
Ms Giorgina Strangio, First Assistant Secretary and Chief People Officer, People and Communication  
Mr Adam Shain, Acting First Assistant Secretary and Chief Digital Officer, Digital Solutions  
Mr Scott Wallace, First Assistant Secretary, Technology Services  
Ms Penny Edwards, Assistant Secretary, Parliamentary and Governance  
Ms Bridie Cosgriff, Assistant Secretary, People and Communication  
Ms Ingrid Nagy, Assistant Secretary, People and Communication  
Mr Mathew Gilliland, Assistant Secretary, Finance and Budget  
Ms Nevin Gamal, Acting Assistant Secretary, Finance and Budget  
Ms Jennifer Hewitt, Assistant Secretary and Chief Internal Auditor, Legal and Assurance  
Employment and Workforce  
Ms Tania Rishniw, Deputy Secretary  
Ms Quyen Tran, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Individuals  
Ms Belinda Catelli, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Individuals  
Ms Kate Woodall, Acting Assistant Secretary, Activities and Experience  
Ms Donna Wood, Acting Assistant Secretary, Contact Centres  
Mr Cameron Le Maitre, Acting Assistant Secretary, National Workforce Solutions  
Dr Andrew Wright, Acting Assistant Secretary, Access and Participation  
Ms Dany Turner, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Individuals  
Mr Alistair Beasley, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Dr Louise O'Rance, Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Mr Bruce Cunningham, Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Ms Anna Ritson, Acting Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Ms Jodie Chamberlain, Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Ms Sharon Huender, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Nadine Groney, Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Abigal Kuttner, Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Mr Niran Gunawardena, Acting Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Edwina Spanos, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Mr Tim Matthews, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Ms Natasha Ryan, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Ms Samantha Robertson, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Ms Susan Pietrukowski, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Ms Miranda Lauman, First Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Business  
Ms Eve Wisowaty, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Business  
Ms Jodie Wearne, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Business  
Mr Jason Stott, First Assistant Secretary, PALM  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 2 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Sue Saunders, Assistant Secretary, PALM  
Ms Felicity Rowe, Acting Assistant Secretary, PALM  
Ms Stacey Lange, Assistant Secretary, PALM  
Ms Cary Duffy, Acting Assistant Secretary, PALM  
Ms Benedikte Jensen, First Assistant Secretary, Planning for My Future Taskforce  
Skills and Training  
Ms Anna Faithfull, Deputy Secretary  
Mr George Thiveos, Senior Responsible Officer, Digital Projects and First Nations Division  
Ms Ann Borg -Barthet, Acting Assistant Secretary, Digital Projects and First Nations Division  
Mr Leo Bator, Acting Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Mr Jonathan McNeill, Director, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Ms Belinda Campbell, First Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Ms Carmen Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Mr Thomas Varendorff, Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Ms Alex Buckley, Acting Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Mr Chris Atkinson, Acting Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Ms Laura Angus, First Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Ms Linda White, Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Mr Daniel Langer, Acting Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Mr Alec Wickerson, Acting Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Ms Jane Hayden, Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Ms Renae Houston, First Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Mr Richard Bolto, Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Ms Katerina Lawler, Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Mr Chris Alach, Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Ms Natasha Platts, Acting Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Ms Vicki Wilkinson, First Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Dr Simon Booth, First Assistant Secretary, VET Data Loans and Compliance Division  
Ms Susan Fitzgerald, Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Ms Beth Ross, Acting Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Ms Carmel O'Regan, Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Mrs Georgianna Duggan, Acting Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Ms Cara Sergeant, Acting Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Jobs and Skills Australia  
Professor Barney Glover AO, Commissioner  
Mr David Turvey, First Assistant Secretary  
Mr Clifton Bingham, Assistant Secretary  
Dr Damian Oliver, Assistant Secretary  
Ms Angela Hope, Assistant Secretary  
Ms Maria Shanahan, Acting Assistant Secretary  
Ms Joanna Reeve, Acting Assistant Secretary  
Workplace Relations  
Mr Gregory Manning, Deputy Secretary  
Ms Danica Yanchenko, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Ms Tara Williams, Assistant Secretary, Emp loyment Conditions  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 3 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Jennifer Wettinger, Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Mr Henry Jones, Acting Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Ms Angela Wallbank, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards  
Mr Ryan Perry, Acting Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Mr Henry Carr, Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards  
Ms Helen McCormack, Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards  
Mr Anshu De Silva Wijeyeratne, Acting Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards  
Mr David Cains, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Ms Elizabeth de Hoog, Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Mr David Denney, Federal Safety Commissioner, Safety and Industry Policy  
Ms Lavinia Gracik -Anczewska, Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Ms Alanna Maddock, Acting Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Ms Sarah Godden, Chief Counsel, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Adrian Breen, Assistant Secretary, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Daniel Tracey, Assistant Secretary, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Stuart Kerr, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Matt Cowgill, Chief Economist, Office of the Chief Economist  
Asbestos and Silica Safety and Eradication Agency  
Ms Jodie Deakes, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Julia Collins, Director, Awareness and International  
Australian Skills Quality Authority  
Ms Saxon Rice, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Christina Bolger, Deputy Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Ty Emerson, Executive Director  
Ms Carmen Basilicata, Executive Director  
Ms Fiona O'Brien, Executive Director  
Ms Denise Carlus -Lowe, Executive Director  
Mr Warren Rushby, Chief Finance Officer  
Comcare  
Mr Greg Vines, Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Michael Duke, General Manager Scheme Management  
Dr Leanne Blackley, Chief Operating Office  
Mr Justin Napier, General Regulatory Operations  
Mr Lachlan Vivian -Taylor, General Claims Management  
Ms Louise Close, General Manager Legal  
Ms Megan Buick, General Manager Strategic Partnerships and Engagement  
Ms Bev Smith, Senior Director National Operations  
Fair Work Commission  
Mr Murray Furlong, General Manager  
Ms Joelle Leggett, Executive Director, Labour Standards Support  
Mr Jack Lambalk, Executive Director, Enabling Services Branch  
Ms Katharine Scarlett, Executive Director, Client Services Delivery  
Ms Jennifer Anderson, Acting Executive Director, Tribunal Support  
Mr Chris Enright, Executive Director, Registered Organisations Services  
Ms Chloe Eaton, Executive Director, Dispute Resolution and Support Services  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 4 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Fair Work Ombudsman  
Ms Anna Booth , Fair Work Ombudsman  
Mr Michael Campbell, Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Mark Scully, Deputy Fair Work Ombudsman, Compliance and Enforcement  
Ms Rachel Volzke, Chief Counsel  
Ms Michelle Carey, Deputy Fair Work Ombudsman, Large Corporates and Industrial Compliance  
Mr Steven Ronson, Executive Director , Enforcement  
Ms Kate Anderson, Acting Executive Director , Industrial Compliance  
Ms Janine Dennis, Executive Director , Legal Compliance and Enforcement Branch  
Mr Anthony Fogarty, Executive Director , Policy  
Ms Nicky Chaffer, Executive Director , Communication  
Safe Work Australia  
Ms Marie Boland, Chief Executive Officer  
Dr Rebecca Newton PhD, Head, Silica Taskforce  
Ms Meredith Bryant, Branch Manager, Evidence, Communications and Industries Policy  
Ms Sarah Costelloe, Branch Manager, WHS Framework and Workers' Compensation Policy  
Mr Duncan Cambray, Chief Corporate Officer  
National Centre for Vocational Education Research  
Mr Simon Walker, Managing Director  
Committee met at 09:02  
CHAIR (Senator Sheldon ):  I declare open this hearing of the Education and Employment Legislation 
Committee into the 2024 -25 budget estimates. I begin by acknowledging the traditional custodians of the land on 
which we meet today and pay my respects to the elders past and present. I extend that respect to Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander peoples here today.  The committee has resolved that written questions on notice should be 
received from senators by close of business on Thursday 20 June 2024. The committee has fixed Thursday 1 
August 2024 as the date for the return of answers to questions taken on notice.  
The committee's proceedings today will begin with corporate enabling services, cross -portfolio and general 
matters of the Employment and Workplace Relations portfolio. Under standing order 26 the committee must take 
all evidence in public session. This includes answers to questions on notice.  
I remind all witnesses that in giving evidence to the committee they are protected by parliamentary privilege. It 
is unlawful for anyone to threaten or disadvantage a witness on account of evidence given to a committee and 
such action may be treated by the Senate as a contempt. It is also a contempt to give false or misleading evidence.  
The Senate has endorsed the following test of relevance of questions at estimates hearings. Any question going 
to the operations or financial position of the departments and agencies which are seeking funds and estimates are 
relevant questions for the purpose of estimates hearings. I remind officers that the Senate has resolved that there 
are no areas in connection with the expenditure of public funds where any person has a discretion to withhold 
details or explanations from the parliament or its committees unless the parliament has expressly provided 
otherwise. The Senate has also resolved that an officer of a department of the Commonwealth shall not be asked 
to give opinions on matters of policy and shall be given reasonable opportunity to refer questions asked of the 
officer to superior officers or to a minister. This resolution does not preclude questions asking for explanations of 
policies or factual questions about when and how policies were adopted.  
Witnesses are reminded of the Senate order specifying the process by which a claim of public interest 
immunity should be raised. I incorporate the public immunity statement into the Hansard . 
The extract read as follows — 
Public interest immunity claims  
That the Senate — 
(a) notes that ministers and officers have continued to refuse to provide information to Senate committees without properly 
raising claims of public interest immunity as required by past resolutions of the Senate;  
(b) reaffirms the principles of past resolutions of the Senate by this order, to provide ministers and officers with guidance  
as to the proper process for raising public interest immunity claims and to consolidate those past resolutions of the Senate;  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 5 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  (c) orders that the following operate as an order of continuing effect:  
(1) If:  
(a) a Senate committee, or a senator in the course of proceedings of a committee, requests information or a document 
from a Commonwealth department or agency; and  
(b) an officer of the department or agency to whom the request is directed believes that it may not be in the public 
interest to disclose the information or document to the committee, the officer shall state to the committee the ground on whi ch 
the officer believes that it may not be in the public interest to disclose the information or document to the committee, and 
specify the harm to the public interest that could result from the disclosure of the information or document.  
(2) If, after receiving the officer 's statement under paragraph (1), the committee or the senator requests the officer to 
refer the question of the disclosure of the information or document to a responsible minister, the officer shall refer that 
question to the minister.  
(3) If a minister, on a reference by an officer under paragraph (2), concludes that it would not be in the public interest to  
disclose the information or document to the committee, the minister shall provide to the committee a statement of the ground 
for that conclusion, specifying the harm to the public interest that could result from the disclosure of the information or 
document.  
(4) A minister, in a statement under paragraph (3), shall indicate whether the harm to the public interest that could result 
from the disclosure of the information or document to the committee could result only from the publication of the information  
or document by the committee, or could result, equally or in part, from the disclosure of the information or document to the 
committee as in camera evidence.  
(5) If, after considering a statement by a minister provided under paragraph (3), the committee concludes that the 
statement does not sufficiently justify the withholding of the information or document from the committee, the committee 
shall report the matter to the Senate.  
(6) A decision by a committee not to report a matter to the Senate under paragraph (5) does not prevent a senator from 
raising the matter in the Senate in accordance with other procedures of the Senate.  
(7) A statement that information or a document is not published, or is confidential, or consists of advice to, or internal 
deliberations of, government, in the absence of specification of the harm to the public interest that could result from the 
disclosure of the information or document, is not a statement that meets the requirements of paragraph (1) or (4).  
(8) If a minister concludes that a statement under paragraph (3) should more appropriately be made by the head of an 
agency, by reason of the independence of that agency from ministerial direction or control, the minister shall inform the 
committee of that conclusion and the reason for that conclusion, and shall refer the matter to the head of the agency, who sh all 
then be required to provide a statement in accordance with paragraph (3).  
(d) requires the Procedure Committee to review the operation of this order and report to the Senate by 20 August 2009.  
(13 May 2009 J.1941)  
(Extract, Senate Standing Orders)  
CHAIR:   I remind all senators that , as we continue our policy implementing the Set the standard  report, as 
chair I'll ensure that proceedings are conducted in an orderly, respectful and courteous way.  
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations  
[09:05]  
CHAIR:   I now welcome Senator the Hon. Murray Watt, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and 
Minister for Emergency Management, representing the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. I also 
welcome representatives from the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, including the secretary, 
Ms Natalie James. Minister Watt, do you wish to make an opening statement?  
Senator Watt:   I don't. Good morning, everyone.  
CHAIR:   Thank you. Ms James, do you wish to make an opening statement?  
Ms James:   I don't have an opening statement. I would just like to table some information, if I might.  
CHAIR:   Thank you.  
Ms James:   Senators Cash and O'Sullivan wrote to me seeking certain information in advance of this hearing. 
The department responded on 31 May to the committee with information that was factual and readily available. 
I'd just like to table the incoming letter and the response.  
CHAIR:   We will circulate that. Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you so much for the response that is now being provided to the committee as a whole. 
Could I turn to one of the issues that we have identified in the response, question 5 and the answer to it, in relation 
to the ongoing issue of the underpayment. Secretary, can you please give me an update of where the department is 
at in terms of properly rectifying the underpayment in the department?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 6 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James:   Yes. That matter is now finalised , and all staff identified in that process to have been underpaid 
have been fully remediated.  
Senator CASH:   When you say the matter is now finalised, on what date was it finalised?  
Ms James:   I will ask Ms Strangio and Ms Cosgriff to give you the dates on which  those payments were made 
and when we communicated.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you very much.  
Ms Cosgriff:   The final payment that we made, as reported at question 5 of Senator O'Sullivan's letter, was on 
9 May 2024. We made one final remediation payment to one employee.  
Senator CASH:   Can you remind me on what date the underpayment was first found?  
Ms Cosgriff:   On 5 June 2023.  
Senator CASH:   So, almost 11 or 12 months later —and that is the final remediation, you've stated. How can 
you be sure that is the final underpayment that's now been taken care of?  
Ms Cosgriff:   We put a number of steps in place to verify the information that we sought to assess the 
underpayment, to understand it and to clarify the information that will validate it with our employees and business 
areas where they were affected.  
Senator CASH:   Can I confirm  that, in February of this year —if I look at the discussion we had then —there 
was an initial cohort of 99 employees; is that correct?  
Ms Cosgriff:   Yes, that's correct.  
Senator CASH:   What was the final cohort?  
Ms Cosgriff:   The final cohort of individual employees is 201.  
Senator CASH:   So it was way in excess of the 99 that we had discussed at estimates in February?  
Ms Cosgriff:   It was larger than the 99 we had discussed in February.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, 99 . It's over double, in fact. When did you discover the extra 102 employees who had 
been underpaid by the department?  
Ms Cosgriff:   I can look up the dates for you.  
Senator CASH:   Would you be kind enough to, please?  
Ms Cosgriff:   I will. I will explain, though, that the initial 99 were related to the issue that was first identified 
in June 2023. We then did our due diligence and conducted a line -by-line assessment of our determination and its 
interaction with the APS award. It was as a result of that due diligence that we then identified further risks of 
underpayments and investigated those thoroughly to identify those additional employees.  
Senator CASH:   So you've identified then an additional 102. The underpayment was actually far worse than 
was originally reported to the Senate . 
Ms Strangio:   There were new instances of underpayments identified. The first 99 were for a limited period, 7 
July 2022 to 11 August 2023. The second round of payments made on 28 March 2024 looked at the period 7 July 
2022 to 11 December 2023. There were a couple of reasons the numbers changed and the amount grew. Firstly, it 
was for a far greater period. Also, our contact centre had grown in that period, so there were, by virtue of that 
growth, more employees who were entitled to overtime payments. In addition, the line -by-line analysis that Ms 
Cosgriff mentioned identified that there were some further and additional payments , including to the original 99 
employees , that then amounted to a higher underpayment.  
Senator CASH:   In summary, though, we started out with a report to the Senate of around 99 that we were 
discussing in February of this year and as a result of your investigations we're now at 201. Again, I ask you: how 
can you guarantee that 201 is the final number of underpaid people in the department?  
Ms Jenkins:   Just to recap, the issue we are talking about here is a very specific underpayment that arose from 
the interaction of our determination, which came about when we set up the department in 2022, and the APS 
award . That covered three particular areas, which Ms Cosgriff mentioned. They were rostered overtime, which 
was the first issue that we identified.  Having looked at the line -by-line of this particular issue —these very unique 
circumstances —we looked at the shift penalties and the restriction allowance.  
What we can say now, though, is on 7 December 2023, the Minister for the Public Service made a section 
24(3) determination, which maintained the existing terms and conditions of the determination that was previously 
bargained. You may recall this was about the 7 am to 7 pm bandwidth. We had that instrument, which meant the 
original issue that we had identified was no longer an issue due to that being made, as I said, on 7 December. Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 7 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Since then, we now have our 2024 to 2027 enterprise agreement, and that commenced operation on 16 April. In 
relation to the matter that we identified, the original employee underpayment —that is the reason we have looked 
at that entire period and made those payments and identified those employees for that period.  
Senator CASH:   Instead of just one reason for the underpayment, you're now saying there are actually several 
reasons that the department has underpaid staff?  
Ms Jenkins:   There were three specific areas that we identified based on a line -by-line assessment of the two 
documents, and I'll just repeat that. That's the rostered overtime, the shift penalties and the restriction allowance.  
Senator CASH:   Secretary, given you are the department of employment , your department —and we've been 
through this before —is meant to be setting an example. We started off questioning this last year. In February of 
this year, we got to 99. We are now at 201. There are now three cases of underpayment, and the reason given in 
relation to the underpayment is it's a very specific underpayment. I'd like to hear an employer give that as a reason 
to the Fair Work Ombudsman. You're the department responsible for legislation in this section. Again, every 
estimates we come back to this, and I'm hoping this will be the final estimates, but I start to worry. Today we're 
up to 201 instances of underpayment. How is that acceptable for Minister Burke's department when you're meant 
to be setting the example to Australians and businesses in Australia?  
Ms James:   The team has articulated pretty clearly that the issue that was the root cause of this, the interaction 
between a section 24(1) determination under the Public Service Act and the Public Service award , is no longer an 
issue. We have an enterprise agreement now , and this matter has been resolved. I am confident that we now have 
systems and processes in place and terms and conditions that are modern and appropriate for a Public Service 
department such as ours. I'm very confident that this matter has been resolved and that we have appropriate 
systems, controls and processes in place under our new enterprise agreement. We're going through the process 
now of consulting with staff about new, modern policies under our enterprise agreement. I'm really pleased and 
proud that this department finally has modern terms and conditions that reflect what our workforce wants and 
needs.  
Senator CASH:   Have you reported back to Minister Burke that the initial 99 that we were discussing in 
February is now 201 staff in his own department who have been underpaid?  
Ms James:   Certainly. We have briefed responsible ministers at key points and we briefed ministers in relation 
to finalising this matter. One of the team, I'm sure, can give you some details with respect to that.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, please.  
Ms Cosgriff:   We provided a written brief to Minister Burke and Minister O'Connor on 22 March 2024 , ahead 
of the payments being made on 28 March 2024. They were the additional remediation payments for 191 
employees at that point in time, which would have made a total of 200 individual employees.  
Senator CASH:   When we spoke at the last estimates, the department advised the committee that you were 
'anticipating an initial report from that audit towards the end of March 2024'. Has that audit now been received?  
Ms James:   It has just been received from the firm, the independent auditor. While the normal process for such 
internal audit reports is they initially go to our department's audit committee, we have, of course, noting the 
importance of this piece of work, reviewed it. We can talk to it now, noting that I think it is finalised but it has not 
yet been reviewed by the audit committee. Is that its status?  
Ms Strangio:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   When you said it has just been received, on what date was it received?  
Ms Jenkins:   I will give you a bit of context before I get my chief internal auditor to come to the table. To 
provide some context, as part of our internal audit program there is a pay and conditions internal audit review. 
That was undertaken by an external person who provides the services to the department.  
Senator CASH:   Who was that?  
Ms Jenkins:   I will get the chief internal auditor. Ms Jenny Hewitt has just come to the table. She can provide 
some context to that, including the answer to your question about wh at date we received it.  
Ms Hewitt:   I'm responsible for the Enterprise Risk Assurance and Investigations Branch. The report was 
received and finalised on 29 May.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'received and finalised' —the auditor sent it to you as a finalised copy of the 
audit?  
Ms Hewitt:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Remind me again who the auditor was?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 8 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Hewitt:   McGrathNichol were engaged as an audit partner for this particular audit.  
Senator CASH:   What was the total cost of this audit?  
Ms Hewitt:   The total cost of the audit was $81,000 GST exclusive.  
Senator CASH:   What were the findings of the audit report?  
Ms Hewitt:   Overall, the audit found that the department had effectively designed end -to-end payroll processes 
and that the department's control for the sample and processes tested were operating effectively.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to table a copy of the audit report for the committee?  
Ms Hewitt:   I don't have it with me, but I can take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   That is very kind. Thank you very much. Has the minister been briefed on the contents of the 
audit report?  
Ms Hewitt:   It only came in last week so, no, not yet.  
Senator CASH:   Who has been briefed on the contents of the audit report?  
Ms Hewitt:   It's been provided, according to our usual processes, up to the audit sponsor, which was Ms 
Strangio, as well as the COO as the responsible deputy secretary. We have provided a copy for the interest of the 
secretary as well.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the findings, are you saying that the audit report found that it was okay to have 
underpaid 201 staff?  
Ms James:   The audit report didn't go to that particular set of issues. To recap from last time, when we 
discovered that we had these concerns, we sought support and advice from a number of legal advisers and, to 
address this very particular issue, a number of auditing advisers. This is a second piece of work to do due 
diligence more broadly on our payroll systems and approach to our entitlements. I think I've got that right, have I, 
Ms Hewitt?  
Ms Hewitt:   That's correct.  
Ms James:   This is a more forward -looking piece going more broadly than the issues we identified, 
remembering that those issues very much arose from the particular circumstances of the determination made 
under section 24(1) of the Public Service Act and its interaction with the Public Service award.  
Senator CASH:   This was a second piece of work that was undertaken at a cost of $81,000. So that $81,000 is 
on top of the other external costs that the department incurred in looking at the underpayment. Can we now do a 
recap of all of the other external costs, given that you have said today that you believe the 201 satisfies all 
employees who were underpaid in these circumstances, please, so we can work out the total cost of the advice 
sought by the department in rectifying the underpayment . 
Ms James:   With respect to rectifying the underpayment, the costs are as we have advised the committee in the 
letter of 31 May that I previously tabled. With respect to this piece of work, this is not related to that 
underpayment. This is part of our internal audit program. All businesses, I would imagine, would from time to 
time be doing due diligence and assurance around their payroll. This is part of our internal audit program. It is 
true that we prioritised it. We made a decision to do it as a result of the issues — 
Senator CASH:   Of the underpayment?  
Ms James:   in the underpayment. I don't think it's appropriate to add this figure onto that, because this is part 
of what any department or any business should be doing to assure themselves they're getting their payroll right.  
Senator CASH:   Which you were not. Your evidence is, though, that it was commissioned —this particular 
audit, the $81,000 audit —because there was a massive underpayment within the department?  
Ms James:   As I said —in fact, I don't think I'd add to what I previously said.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to then table for the committee the instructions to the auditor in relation to this 
particular audit, please?  
Ms James:   There would have been audit scope. I'm not sure that we have it with us, but — 
Senator CASH:   Could you take  on notice to provide it to the committee? Could we go through what the final 
costs to date are in relation to the total cost of the remediation? In the letter on page 4, you state:  
Remediation payments have now been made to 201 employees who were not paid their correct entitlements under the 
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations determination. These employees were APS3 to APS6 classifications. 
The total cost of the remediation payments was $243,064.31, including indexation.  
Are you saying that was the total cost of the underpayment?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 9 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Cosgriff:   Yes, that's correct.  
Senator CASH:   So it's significantly more than what we talked about last year and even in terms of February 
this year. We were actually talking about a total figure of less than $100,000. It is now $243,064.31. Payments 
were made on 26 October 2023, 28 March 2024 and 9 May 2024 , and the average indexed amount is now 
$810.21. That's the average over the 201 employees?  
Ms Cosgriff:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   Then it also states 'please also refer to' a particular question on notice. Since this question on 
notice was provided to the committee, one additional payment was made on 9 May 2024, equating to $5,982.18. 
When was that identified? You've provided us with an answer to question on notice 00623, but then you've 
continued to look at the issue and you've now identified another underpayment. That underpayment is actually 
quite a significant one, $5,982.18. When was that one identified?  
Ms Cosgriff:   I will have to find the date for you or take that on notice. It was after we'd made the payments on 
28 March 2024.  
Senator CASH:   This is the issue I'm having, though. The secretary has said today that she is confident that 
the matter is finalised. Yet, even in the letter to us, it says that since this question on notice was provided one 
additional payment was made on 9 May 2024, 'equating to $5,982.18'. My question is: how can we be satisfied 
with the evidence of the secretary ? Even this letter itself has identified a further underpayment . 
Ms Cosgriff:   Let me explain how that one came about. This is in relation to one employee who is a team 
leader in our contact centre area. They're not typically a rostered employee. What we did throughout this process 
is a number of checks and balances. There were employees who we were able to identify were on rosters and also 
their attendance records showed rostered shifts; that then allowed us to identify and calculate a specific 
underpayment for them. There were other employees that we identified through analysis of attendance records, 
where they were working a roster  type pattern. However, they were not on rosters. With those employees we 
needed to verify with the business areas that they were actually directed to work rostered shifts and it wasn't just 
their choice of hours that were similar to a rostered pattern.  This individual was a team leader and they were 
identified as working a rostered pattern of shifts. Their data was provided to the business area to be checked , and 
it was missed because that employee was acting at a higher classification. That meant they were no longer eligible 
during the acting period for those additional entitlements, because at the executive level 1 they weren't entitled to 
the additional payments. They came back to us and we identified  that one was missed; there were dates that 
needed to be paid.  
Senator CASH:   The issue that I have with the evidence is that at the last estimates , when we discussed the 
growing cohort of employees underpaid by Minister Burke's department, the evidence there was pretty much that 
you were satisfied there wasn't a growing cohort. We now know there was a growing cohort. Further work has 
been done. As I said, I think initially, if I look back at our discussions, at one stage we were talking about a cohort 
of 62 employees. That then went to 99 employees. We are now at 201 employees. You've now identified that this 
person in relation to the underpayment of $5,982.18 was not typically rostered and they were a team leader.  
Again, the issue I therefore have is that the evidence the Secretary has given is that the Secretary is satisfied there 
are no further underpayments. Can you see how I'm struggling with that? In this letter alone, we've identified 
what I would argue is quite a large underpayment of $5,982.18. So, Secretary, I ask you again: can you guarantee 
that this is the end of this matter?  
Ms James:   I fear you may have inadvertently misrepresented our evidence at the last estimates hearing. My 
memory is that we did foreshadow that there would be more underpayments and that we were doing ongoing 
work with a legal firm. Indeed, this work had commenced in late 2023 or early 2024. This second round of 
work —the due diligence we were doing, the line -by-line comparison between the APS Award and the 
determination to identify which other clauses might, because of the interaction issues, be the source of 
underpayments —was both a complex legal task initially, and then there was a calculation task to be done.  It is not 
the case that we represented last time that it was done. I would suggest quite the contrary; we said there was work 
still going and foreshadowed that we hoped for that to be concluded quite soon. I am now confident that we have 
identified the sources of underpayment and that we have identified individuals underpaid. It is always the case 
that you need to work with your staff to ensure that you understand who might have been caught by particular 
work conditions or practices. This would have come about because of the ongoing communication we were 
having with the contact centre team. Throughout we have worked with that team to ensure that anyone who had 
any questions or thought perhaps they may have had an underpayment should come forward to our human 
resources area. At no point did we assume that our desktop based work, our calculations and roster review, Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 10 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  thorough as it was, as good as our records were, was going to catch every single person. This was a person who 
we would not normally have expected to have been working in a rostered manner and they were.  
Senator CASH:   As good as your records were, with 201 employees underpaid to a total value at this point in 
time of $243,064.31, one may also argue that the recordkeeping wasn't as good as it could have been, given as I 
said at every estimates, despite reassurances, we seem to have a new cohort of employees who have been 
underpaid in Minister Burke's department. Are you saying that the $243,064.31 is the absolute final figure of the 
underpayments?  
Ms James:   I'm confident that it is the final figure of the underpayments, unless there is someone who has yet 
to come forward. I'm confident that the discussions we've had with our people and the work that we've done has 
identified people in the categories doing the sort of work that might have been underpaid. I would also say I don't 
accept that our recordkeeping was not as good as it might have been. At no point has recordkeeping been one of 
the issues that led to this occurring.  
Senator CASH:   Do you expect people to self -identify as being underpaid?  
Ms James:   We expect our systems and controls to identify these issues. In addition to that, as is best practice, 
we ensure that we explain what has happened and ensure that any other staff member who feels they might have 
been underpaid or our desktop work, thorough as it is, might have missed them, is encouraged to have a 
conversation so we can identify whether they were caught up. That is best practice in these matters.  
Senator CASH:   How many of the 201 self -identified?  
Ms James:   I would expect very few, but I'll ask the team.  
Ms Cosgriff:   We don't have that information to hand.  
Senator CASH:   Could you take it on notice for us — 
Ms Cosgriff:   Sure.  
Senator CASH:   and have a look at how many of the 201 self -identified? In terms of evidence at the last 
estimates, this is what I put to you, Secretary:  
So, in terms of those statements, are you able to then guarantee, based on all the work that's been undertaken, the $221,884. 71 
that's been expended as at December 2023, the audits that you're undertaking, the steering committee that you have and the 
multitude of processes that you've put in place, that there are no further underpayments from the department?  
Your response back to me was:  
I can guarantee that we have rectified the root cause of this series of underpayments, because we're no longer operating unde r 
a determination that needs to be read in an integrated way with the Public Service Award. I think I'm in a position to 
guarantee that, when we finish our process, which includes independent expert advisors and engagement with our staff who 
have been underpaid to verify that we're getting it right, we will have made good the underpayments that occurred with 
respect to some of our people between 7 July 2022 and 11 December 2023.  
Do you stand by that evidence given in the February estimates?  
Ms James:   I'd appreciate a page reference to the Hansard . 
Senator CASH:   I haven't got that on me, but I can get it for you. Do you stand by that guarantee?  
Ms James:   I do. That is consistent with my evidence just now, which is that we had a process underway and 
that we were continuing to work through the issues about the interaction between the award and the determination 
made under section 24(1) of the Public Service Act.  
Senator CASH:   As a percentage of the total workforce in the department, how many were underpaid? It was 
page 16 of the Hansard , for your reference.  
Ms James:   I am not going to attempt to do maths on the run. I'm sure we can give you a figure of the total 
number of employees, and someone might like to do a percentage calculation. I don't think we have that number 
to hand, but we certainly have the numbers that could enable someone else to calculate that number. Ms Strangio?  
Ms Strangio:   The only thing I would add is that some of those are former employees and there is a point in 
time in relation to attributing it as a proportion.  
Senator CASH:   I think I've got to share the call and then I'll come back to that.  
CHAIR:   Do you have any questions?  
Senator GROGAN:   No, thank you. I don't have any questions in this section.  
CHAIR:   Back to you.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 11 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Could I now just turn to the expenses in relation to the underpayment and, again, just putting 
in place the remediation payments, $243,064.31 as our final figure —and we'll come back at the next estimates 
and test that. Can you give me now the total amount or the full breakdown of expenses related to that repayment 
of the underpayment of DEWR's staff? In the letter it says $300,380.71. Is that the final figure?  
Ms Cosgriff:   That figure is correct. I can give you a breakdown of that figure if you'd like. Is that what you've 
asked for?  
Senator CASH:   That would be very interesting. Thank you very much.  
Ms Cosgriff:   That was the data analysis costs, $168,576.54.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of data analysis and calculation, remind the Senate committee what that actually 
was. That was Cobalt Consulting?  
Ms Cosgriff:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   For exactly $168,000 what did they do?  
Ms Cosgriff:   They collated all of the data and information that we needed to assess, identify and calculate the 
amounts owing to our employees. That was quite a time intensive and specialised analytical exercise. It involved 
bringing together things like our employee records that had their rates of pay, their location or time zone, their 
attendance records, their roster data and any other information from business areas to necessitate that analysis and 
calculate the underpayments.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to table a copy of that invoice for the Senate committee from Cobalt 
Consulting?  
Ms Cosgriff:   Table? I don't have it with me, but I can take it on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, take it on notice to table for the Senate committee. In terms of the legal advice —I know 
we've gone through this previously —you now have three separate instances of legal advice: legal advice from 
Ashurst, legal advice from Kingston Reid, and legal advice from the Australian Government Solicitor; is that 
correct?  
Ms Cosgriff:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   At a total cost of $116,426.17, and I'll get you to take on notice to table those invoices as 
well. In terms of the advice from Ashurst, were they the first firm that you contracted?  
Ms Cosgriff:   That is correct.  
Senator CASH:   Kingston Reid were the second firm you contracted?  
Ms Cosgriff:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   Remind me, why did you have to contract a second firm?  
Ms James:   I think we did traverse some of this territory last time. I'm just looking for it because I want to 
draw the committee's attention to what we said last time. We went first to Ashurst because they had assisted us; 
indeed, they had drafted a draft determination back at the time of the machinery -of-government change. That's 
when we went to Ashurst. At the point we came to understand that our issues were related to the determination 
itself and its interaction with section 24(1) of the Public Service Act and how you interpret that and the award, it 
became apparent that we were asking Ashurst to advise on their own work. It was important to us to get 
independent advice from a specialist workplace relations law firm, which is why we went to Kingston Reid.  
Senator CASH:   Then the AGS?  
Ms James:   We went to the AGS because as we were working through the issues with Kingston Reid —and I 
want to be careful here because I don't want to disclose the content of legal advice —it became apparent there 
were absolutely some issues about the interpretation of section 24(1) of the Public Service Act. At that point it 
became apparent to us that we should be ensuring that the Public Service Commission, as the agency responsible 
for the Public Service Act, should be involved. Because of some of those threshold interpretation issues and the 
consequences from different interpretations, we made a decision at that point to go to the Australian Government 
Solicitor. I believe there was a certain point where the advice was joint advice that we were seeking, and so that 
was what informed that decision.  
Senator CASH:   Are they the final invoices in terms of the final cost, the $116,000?  
Ms Cosgriff:   Yes, they are.  
Senator CASH:   Then with the communication from Elm Communications, $15,378 —and we'll go through 
that shortly —you get a total remediation of $243,064.31, but the expenses incurred by the department in relation Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 12 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  to the underpayment actually exceed that, $300,380.71. Has Minister Burke apologised to the staff yet in relation 
to the underpayment? I know at each of the other estimates the answer was, no. Given this has been a growing 
cohort as we meet each estimates, has he yet taken it upon himself to apologise?  
Ms James:   As we've traversed in previous estimates hearings, it's not the minister's responsibility, it is my 
responsibility —what has happened here —as accountable authority.  
Senator CASH:   In saying that, he is the head of the department who has brought in legislation that 
criminalises wage theft. Not only that, as he said last year, we've changed the law to make wage theft a crime and 
the message is simple: just pay people properly. Has he at least raised with you, Secretary, the failure of the 
department to pay people properly?  
Ms James:   We have had no further conversations in relation to this matter beyond what I traversed in the last 
Senate estimate's hearing.  
Senator CASH:   With the minister?  
Ms James:   With the minister.  
Senator CASH:   Despite the fact that at the last Senate estimates we were talking about 99 and now we're 
talking about 201, there have been no further conversations with the minister in relation to the department's 
underpayment?  
Ms James:   I have had no further conversations with the minister in relation to that matter. As previously 
noted in evidence here this morning, we have briefed responsible ministers in relation to the developments and the 
resolution of this matter.  
Senator CASH:   Have the responsible ministers got back to you in relation to that briefing?  
Ms James:   They were briefs for noting, so I would not have expected anything other than that.  
Senator CASH:   Low expectations! In terms of the percentage of the workforce underpaid, my understanding 
is the department's ASL in the budget papers for 2023 -24 is 3,786. Acknowledging the point -in-time nature, 201 
underplayed employees means about five per cent of Minister Burke's department, or your workforce, has been 
underpaid. Does that sound right to you?  
Ms James:   I'm not going to comment on the calculation in particular. The point -of-time question is relevant.  
Senator CASH:   It is relevant. It's 201 employees at a particular point in time.  
Ms James:   No. As Ms Cosgriff pointed out in her previous evidence to you —or Ms Strangio —the cohort 
does include employees who have left us.  
Senator CASH:   A quick Google search would indicate that Woolworths, for example, has well over 200,000 
employees. If they perform to the same standard as Minister Burke's department, they would have underpaid 
around 10,000 staff. Do you think that's acceptable?  
Ms James:   I'm not — 
Senator CASH:   Five per cent of their workforce being underpaid?  
Ms James:   I'm not going to comment on another employer and the integrity of their wages system.  
Senator CASH:   Five per cent of a department's workforce being underpaid —are you saying that is an 
acceptable figure given that, in particular, Minister Burke last year as you know stated, 'We've changed the law to 
make wage theft a crime, and the message is simple: just pay people properly'? We have gone from around, at last 
year's estimates, in the sixties, in February's estimates to 99, and we're now at 201. Are you saying that Minister 
Burke has not said, 'Why is my own department underpaying five per cent of our staff?' All he got was a noting 
brief.  
Ms James:   I don't have anything to add.  
Senator CASH:   Clearly, because there is nothing to add; you've underpaid one in 20 employees.  
Ms James:   That is your figure. It is not mine.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine. I'll get you to do the math and come back to us on notice in relation to that.  
Ms James:   Certainly.  
Senator CASH:   But the reality will be that Minister Burke's department has underpaid five per cent of its staff 
and he has not even apologised for that, despite a change in the law in relation to criminalised wage theft. He 
made it very clear to the rest of Australia, 'Just pay people properly', and in this estimates we've actually had an 
increase. In fact, it's more than a 50 per cent increase —99 and 99 equals less than 201 —in relation to his own 
staff. Can we just now go to the communications —Elm Communications. I do want to go through this again. This Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 13 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  was last estimates. You said they provided the necessary products at a cost of $15,378. Portfolio question No. 
SQ24 -000025 was a number of documents that you provided to us. I've had a look at the documents and it is 
roughly just over seven pages and, I think I calculated, 2,810 words. Ms James, at the last estimates you said in 
relation to this expense, 'I determined that this was the appropriate course of action at the time.' If you actually 
cost it out, that email has cost the taxpayer around $5.47 per word? Do you still think that is an appropriate course 
of action?  
Ms James:   I think it's entirely appropriate for an employer to seek independent assistance in ensuring that 
they properly manage an underpayment issue.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of communicating with the actual staff themselves by way of an email?  
Ms Jenkins:   Just to give some context —and this is on Hansard  from the last time we gave evidence —the 
work that was undertaken by Elm Communications wasn't limited to that email. We gave evidence in QON SQ24 -
000025, which also has attached to it some information that was placed on our intranet. That is a place where our 
staff go to to get lots of their information.   
As to one of the things that we worked with the Elm Communications team on in a very fast manner, because 
remembering once we found this we wanted to be able to communicate clearly to our staff what it actually meant 
for them —when you look at the information we have provided you there, it is more than just the email. It's 'How 
do we explain these issues to our staff?' There are some graphics associated with that. We needed to talk to the 
team about how they might communicate these matters. So it is more than that particular email.  
The other evidence that we gave at the time was around the fact that because we were working through this at 
that time there were a limited number of people who were aware of this until we worked it through. The 
independent assessment was really important. I think maybe Ms Strangio just wanted to add to that point.  
Senator CASH:   So independent assessment of what?  
Ms James:   Of how we could communicate this.  
Senator CASH:   So $5.47 actually does take into account what you've just referred to. Again, Ms James, are 
you really saying the evidence you're prepared to give to the committee is there was no -one in your department 
who could have performed the work that Elm consulting did for the $15,000?  
Ms James:   We traversed this territory last time. I've got nothing to add to my evidence from last time.  
Senator CASH:   So you stand by your evidence? There was no -one in the department; despite that, I'm 
assuming you have a communications team?  
Ms James:   I do believe we traversed this evidence last time, and it wasn't only that there was no -one 
available, it was the need for independence, and a little also about capability.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'capability', what do you mean by 'capability'?  
Ms James:   I'd rather we refer to my evidence from last time.  
Senator CASH:   No, you've just put that on the evidence then, and I'm just trying to understand what you 
meant by 'capability'?  
Ms James:   I was reflecting on my evidence from last time, which I don't have in front of me. I'm happy to 
pause while I find the page reference and read it back to you.  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind? The underpayments have doubled since last time. I'm just trying to 
understand what you mean by 'capability'. Do you mean that there was no -one in the department capable of doing 
this? Just in terms of Elm Communications themselves, how big are they? Are they a huge firm?  
Ms Strangio:   I'll just briefly go to the earlier question and then touch on Elm Communications. In relation to 
the question of whether or not we had or hadn't the capability, this was a new and unique circumstance for our 
department. We didn't have expertise in managing this type of matter.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'managing this type of matter' — 
Ms Strangio:   An underpayment of this nature.  
Senator CASH:   Sorry? What was that?  
Ms Strangio:   An underpayment of this nature. In relation to Elm, they are a small business. I don't know 
the— 
Senator CASH:   When you say a 'small business', how many?  
Ms Strangio:   I don't know the number of employees.  
Senator CASH:   How was Elm chosen?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 14 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Strangio:   I'm sure we touched on this last time. Elm is part of a panel. So Elm is available on a panel. Elm 
has worked with a number of government departments providing strategic communications advice.  
Senator CASH:   Since their initial contract, have you commissioned Elm Communications or any other group 
to help you write emails about this underpayment matter or any other matter?  
Ms Strangio:   No, not related matter — 
Senator CASH:   When you say, 'No, not related matter' — 
Ms Strangio:   You said 'any other matter', and  I think that's quite broad. I wouldn't want to attribute that. But 
for this particular matter, the first part of it, I can say confidently that, no, we have not.  
Senator CASH:   So let's park that one. In relation to any other — 
Ms Strangio:   I'm not aware whether anyone else in the department may have, but I certainly haven't.  
Senator CASH:   Secretary, has anyone else in the department contracted Elm to write emails for the 
department?  
Ms James:   I'm not aware of that.  
Senator CASH:   I might get you to take on notice just to confirm that.  
Ms James:   Certainly.  
Senator CASH:   We've gone over at a number of estimates the use of contractors by the department and in 
particular external consultants. This government continues to say that we should not be using external consultants, 
almost as a virtue. Yet what's confusing me is, though, you think it's appropriate to contract a firm to assist you in 
writing an email explaining an underpayment to your department. Can you see, Secretary, how the use of 
contractors in this circumstance could be a little confusing?  
Senator Watt:   Not only has the government not made the statement you've suggested; in fact, both I and 
Minister Burke have on several occasions acknowledged that businesses will have a need from time to time to use 
contract staff, labour hire staff, in particular for short -term projects. What we have an issue with as a government 
is the abuse of contracting arrangements and labour hire arrangements by employers to categorise long -term 
workers as labour hire or contractors when that work could be insourced. We know that the former government 
had a practice of outsourcing a lot of this work to labour hire firms, contracting firms, as a shadow workforce to 
falsely cap the APS numbers. But all that did was create job insecurity and cost taxpayers more. We haven't 
actually said there is no place for contractors and there is no place for labour hire. What we've said is that people 
who are actually long -term employees in the same job, where possible, should be insourced, and that's exactly 
what our government has been doing. But it doesn't mean we won't ever use contractors or labour hire.  
Senator CASH:   So you're happy to stand by a firm drafting an email for the department in relation to an 
underpayment at a cost of $15,378?  
Senator Watt:   Again — 
Senator CASH:   You're happy to stand by that there was no -one in the department capable of writing an email 
of this nature?  
Senator Watt:   Of course, that's absolutely not what I said. What I was doing was talking about the general 
position of the government.  
Senator CASH:   Did you have any further information for me, Secretary?  
Ms James:   Firstly, I fear you have inadvertently misrepresented our evidence. Ms Jenkins made it very clear 
that the work done by this company was not just the email. I just want to emphasise that to the committee, 
because it's not correct to characterise the sole outcome of the work as that product.  On page 13 of the transcript, 
when we were talking to the use of this company, I talked about the importance of independent advisers, and then 
it was actually Ms Jenkins who then noted : 
We have the resources within the department who are now fully in charge … we were very busy at that time trying to 
understand the issue. Then, subsequently, we have Ms Strangio's team who do the communications work on this.  
I didn't use the word 'capability' , so I do withdraw that. I probably should have paused from the outset to review 
the transcript.  
CHAIR:   For clarity for those listening in , I want to go to a question that was raised earlier. In the case where 
there are wage miscalculations or inadvertent mistakes —I was a union official in my previous life, as many of 
you know, and I've carried out wage inspections across the industry sectors and I've found genuine mistakes that 
people make. Sometimes they're misinterpretations or sometimes they're just system failures or consistent human 
errors, which do happen because of misinterpretation. When it gets rectified, it gets rectified. This is a bit Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 15 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  longwinded, but I've done thousands of inspections in my life. There is consistently something that goes wrong 
somewhere because that's the nature of it; not everything is perfect, heaven forbid. The question that goes to the 
heart of where there's deliberate wage theft, where there's both knowledge and intent, is where the legislation 
particularly has a poignant piece of responsibility. Just briefly, where there's deliberate wage theft, what is the 
response to deliberate wage theft?  
Ms James:   Do you mean from an employer or from the system?  
CHAIR:   From the employer when there's a deliberate intent for wage theft?  
Ms James:   It's hard for me to speak to an employer with that mindset, although when I was Fair Work 
Ombudsman we did come across what you couldn't avoid describing as deliberate conduct. I don't think I feel 
comfortable speaking to the mindset as to the results in someone taking that approach. Certainly the legal 
framework now has a suite of consequences for when that happens —it's always been unlawful —most recently 
with civil penalties applying for any failure to pay correct wages irrespective of intent. There are now also greater 
civil penalties in the case where it's serious and systemic. I haven't quite got that language right, but our 
workplace relations colleagues will be able to elaborate. Certainly now there are criminal penalties that apply in 
some cases where there is underpayment of wages that has come about as a result of deliberate action.  
CHAIR:   Thank you. That's helpful. If need be, I'll ask some more questions when we have the workplace 
relations people here.  
Senator CASH:   Just on that, do you consider the wage underpayments in your department serious or 
systemic?  
Ms James:   I am conscious that the matter was reported to the Fair Work Ombudsman, and it's not yet, as far 
as I'm aware, formally resolved with the Fair Work Ombudsman. It is the regulator's role to make final judgments 
in relation to those things. I would not describe the issues as serious in the legislative way or meeting the 
legislative test. I would say that we, as a department, took them very seriously.  
Senator CASH:   Surely as the secretary of the department you should have a view on whether or not you have 
engaged as a department in serious or systemic wage underpayment? Are you saying that it's merely for the Fair 
Work Ombudsman to make such a determination?   
Ms James:   I don't want to comment on the possible application of laws that do apply to every employer, that 
apply to us and that the Fair Work Ombudsman has the role of overseeing and making decisions about. The 
appropriate place to direct the question about the investigation is the Fair Work Ombudsman, and you will have 
that opportunity tomorrow.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of that, on what date did you refer yourselves or the department to the Fair Work 
Ombudsman for the underpayment?  
Ms Cosgriff:   On 9 August 2023 we first notified.  
Senator CASH:   What follow -up have you had with a Fair Work Ombudsman in that time?  
Ms Cosgriff:   We've provided them with updates as the matter has progressed.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'updates', were they at the request of the Fair Work Ombudsman?  
Ms Cosgriff:   Both at our own initiative and at the request of the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator CASH:   On 9 August you initially reported the underpayment to the Fair Work Ombudsman. What 
has been the time line of contact with the Fair Work Ombudsman and the response of the department since then?  
Ms Cosgriff:   I'll walk you through some of the data that I've got available to me here. We provided an update 
to the Fair Work Ombudsman on 20 October 2023 on all of the payments that were made on 26 October, just 
ahead of those payments. We provided an update on 6 November 2023. We provided another update on 13 
December 2023, an update on 1 February 2024, another update on 5 April 2024 and the most recent update was 
on Friday, 31 May 2024.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to provide copies of all of that to the committee?  
Ms James:   No, sorry. I'm just conscious that it's a live investigation. Perhaps we could take that on notice, 
because if it was via email it will have their responses and that might disclose things about how they respond. If it 
was telephone calls, we may not have detailed records.  
Senator CASH:   That's okay. I'll get you to take it on notice to see what you can provide.  
Ms James:   Could we? I'm very happy to talk about the engagement, but I'm — Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 16 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That's okay. Perhaps that might be the easy thing. Has anybody been interviewed by the Fair 
Work Ombudsman?  
Ms Strangio:   We've met with the Fair Work Ombudsman. I don't know if that would be characterised as an 
interview as such, but we have met with them.  
Senator CASH:   On how many occasions have you met with the Fair Work Ombudsman?  
Ms Strangio:   Twice at the most. Yes, we'll confirm that.  
Senator CASH:   We'll make sure we confirm that with the Fair Work Ombudsman tomorrow. On what dates 
and who in the department met with the Fair Work Ombudsman?  
Ms Cosgriff:   I don't have the full details of that at hand.  
Ms Strangio:   We can provide that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Secretary, have you met with the Fair Work Ombudsman in relation to the underpayment?  
Ms James:   No. 
Senator CASH:   Has someone in the department been nominated to liaise with the Fair Work Ombudsman in 
relation to the underpayment?  
Ms Cosgriff:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Who is that?  
Ms Cosgriff:   Me. 
Senator CASH:   Can you give an approximate date? Did you meet with them last year?  
Ms Cosgriff:   The most recent meeting was, I believe, earlier this year, which would have been the date I gave 
you, 1 February 2024. There was another date last year, but I don't recall off the top of my head which one that 
was. 
Senator CASH:   Take me through this. What's the expectation of the Fair Work Ombudsman in relation to an 
investigation like this? When we talk about the Fair Work Ombudsman, are we referring to the Fair Work 
Ombudsman herself, Ms Booth, or are we referring to an investigator in the Fair Work Ombudsman's team, just to 
be fair to Ms Booth.  
Ms Jenkins:   The details of their investigations would actually be a matter for the Fair Work Ombudsman. 
What we can tell you, though, is that we have been very proactive. As soon as we have something to tell the Fair 
Work Ombudsman we have been providing that by email. One of the examples that Ms Cosgriff gave was on 
Friday night we did provide some information. They came back. That was in relation to the pay and conditions 
internal audit that we spoke about. That's an important part of the work that we're doing to assure the Fair Work 
Ombudsman that we are taking this matter very seriously, so we did as soon as that was provided to us. We then 
let the Fair Work Ombudsman know —I say 'we' —through Ms Cosgriff. They pretty much responded 
immediately. Then Ms Cosgriff provided them with some extra information.  What we can say is that we have 
been engaging them, as you would with any regulator, and that it's important that you keep providing them with 
information as it comes to hand. If they have any questions of us, we have continued to be responsive to those 
queries. It's really important for us, though, that the Fair Work Ombudsman treats us as it would anybody else.  
Senator CASH:   I would hope so.  
Ms Jenkins:   For that very reason, the engagement between the department is between someone from the HR 
department and the appropriate level of investigators at their end. To your question about Ms Booth, that is why, 
for example, we wouldn't have conversations with Ms Booth about this.  
Senator CASH:   So it is someone in the Fair Work Ombudsman's HR department?  
Ms Jenkins:   Sorry, someone from the Fair Work Ombudsman's —I'm going to get the label wrong ; I don't 
know whether it's called the investigations department or the regulatory department. We can find that out, but it is 
someone who deals with matters. It is not any other area other than the person who would normally look at these 
types of matters for the department.  
Ms James:   I am conscious that we are now traversing territory about the Fair Work Ombudsman's 
methodology when examining underpayment issues. I'm very conscious that we allow them to speak for their 
methodologies and also consider the appropriate boundaries around the extent to which they disclose their 
methodologies.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 17 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That's fine. I have a series of questions in relation to the underpayment that I'll put to the Fair 
Work Ombudsman. From this perspective I'm more interested in the department's engagement with the Fair Work 
Ombudsman. Has there been an official investigation opened in relation to the underpayment by the department?  
Ms James:   Again, that would be a question to put to the Fair Work Ombudsman. I don't believe that language 
has been used; nevertheless, it's a matter for them.  
Senator CASH:   You self -reported, and at this point there's ongoing dialogue between the Fair Work 
Ombudsman and the department in relation to the underpayment?  
Ms James:   I think that's a fair description.  
Senator CASH:   You've said now that the costs are final, the expenses are $300,380.71 and the total cost of 
the remediations is $243,064.31. When do you expect to receive a finding from the Fair Work Ombudsman? Have 
they given you any indication of that?  
Ms Jenkins:   That's a matter for the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator CASH:   At this point, it is still ongoing dialogue with the Fair Work Ombudsman?  
Ms Jenkins:   We continue to provide them information and provide them with responses.  
Senator CASH:   Are you keeping Minister Burke updated in relation to the inquiry by the Fair Work 
Ombudsman?  
Ms James:   I would advise responsible ministers in the event there were any significant developments in 
relation to our engagement with the Fair Work Ombudsman. At this stage it's ongoing. It's ongoing.  
Senator CASH:   Has Minister Burke communicated to the department the importance of paying staff in his 
own department correctly?  
Ms James:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   When did he do that?  
Ms James:   I think that would have been when I first advised him of the matter as per our evidence — 
Senator CASH:   Twelve months ago.  
Ms James:   over previous estimates.  
Senator CASH:   To go back to previous evidence over previous estimates, my understanding is you hadn't had 
a direct conversation with Minister Burke?  
Ms James:   I haven't had a conversation with Minister Burke about this matter since I advised him of it on 25 
July 2023.  
Senator CASH:   So there hasn't been a conversation. Despite the fact that Minister Burke is very happy to 
lecture businesses across Australia in relation to their responsibilities, you haven't had a conversation with 
Minister Burke since that time?  
Senator Watt:   That's your characterisation, and that's probably not an appropriate question.  
Senator CASH:   You don't see the hypocrisy, Minister Watt?  
Senator Watt:   It is probably not an appropriate question to put to officials.  
Senator CASH:   You don't see the hypocrisy, Minister Watt, of Minister Burke's stance publicly — 
Senator Watt:   We've gone over this.  
Senator CASH:   about what is happening in his own department?  
Senator Watt:   We've gone over this at previous estimates hearings.  
Senator CASH:   Do you think it's appropriate then for the minister not to have had a conversation with the 
secretary of the department in particular given the escalating figures that we have at every estimates since July 
2023?  
Senator Watt:   All I was going to say —and I think Ms James has something to add here —is at previous 
estimates hearings we've gone over the fact that Minister Burke has raised this and had a discussion with Ms 
James about this some time ago. I've said at previous estimates committees that, of course, the Australian 
government doesn't approve of underpayments, and expects this matter to be addressed as quickly as possible.  
Senator CASH:   'As quickly as possible' is taking some time, given that it's been well over 12 months now, 
Minister Watt.  
Senator Watt:   The officials have explained why.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 18 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Do you think that those explanations given by the officials are sufficient for businesses that 
are in a similar situation?  
Senator Watt:   I think it's always going to depend on the situation. Some underpayments are very 
straightforward and can be fixed very easily. Others are more complicated.  
Senator CASH:   Minister Burke's own words are 'just pay people properly', but , as you've just said, sometimes 
it can actually be difficult to do that given the nature of the instruments governing employment.  
Senator Watt:   That's not what I said. I was addressing your point about fixing the underpayments. I wasn't 
talking about underpayments occurring in the first place.  
Senator CASH:   Can I confirm, then, is this the final estimates where I will see an increase in the number of 
people underpaid? Is this now it; can you guarantee to us the 201 is now the final figure? Ms James?  
Ms James:   I think we've covered this in this hearing already. The Fair Work Ombudsman is still looking at 
this issue. From our point of view, we have identified and remediated the underpayments arising from the 
interaction between the Public Service Award and the section 24(1) determination made under the Public Service 
Act that applied with respect to employees at the time.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of our next estimates, what consequences will there be if at the next estimates there 
are more than 201 who are underpaid? Are we just going to continue to have this conversation that more have 
been identified? What is the department doing to ensure this does not occur?  
Ms James:   I'm confident that we have put in place the systems and controls necessary to ensure that we are 
dealing with our payroll appropriately. As we've previously noted, the determination in question no longer 
applies, so it's not possible for more of these types of underpayments to be identified. I will just note, reflecting on 
the conversation we've had about the Fair Work Ombudsman's role here, of course this all depends on them being 
comfortable with the interpretation we've adopted and the methodology we've adopted with respect to rectifying 
this. I am confident that we've been very careful and well advised in relation to this. It is the Fair Work 
Ombudsman's role to ensure that we're accountable and that we've done this appropriately.  
Senator CASH:   Absolutely. The issue I have with the evidence is you admitted today that there were other 
areas of underpayment that you didn't know about last time; hence now the jump in the figures. This is why I'm 
not sure that there won't be an additional cohort that are found to have been underpaid at the next estimates 
hearing.  
Ms James:   You may have inadvertently misrepresented my earlier evidence. We were carrying out the work 
with our independent legal advisers to identify any other interaction issues between the section 24(1) 
determination and the Public Service Award. When we last came to estimates, we referred to that work occurring, 
and so it was not unknown to us that there was a possibility that there would be future payments. We were doing 
as thorough a job as we could. On page 16 of the transcript, a little further along from the pages we were looking 
at before, we noted that we were still calculating and noting that the end date for the arrangements was 11 
December 2023. You asked me, 'So you're still working through it?', and I confirmed, 'Yes.'  
Senator CASH:   Minister Watt, will Minister Burke be apologising to the staff who've been underpaid, given 
the significant increase since our last estimates?  
Senator Watt:   Both Minister Burke and I have publicly stated what our expectations are, and Ms James has 
been handling this to try to get it resolved as quickly as possible.  
Senator CASH:   The statement 'just pay people properly' is actually much more difficult in reality than the 
minister might make out?  
Senator Watt:   No, I think the minister and I would stand by that statement. That is our government's position, 
that employers should just pay people properly, and that applies to both public sector and private sector 
employers.  
Senator CASH:   But he won't be apologising to his own staff, is what you're saying?  
Senator Watt:   I can't add anything to what I've already said.  
Senator CASH:   He won't be apologising, given in February it was 99 and today it's 201 staff — 
Senator Watt:   I'm not going to add anything further to what I said.  
Senator CASH:   in his own department who have been underpaid. That's very disappointing, I would have 
thought. Chair, I've got a series of questions on the Future Made in Australia package that I think will be asked in 
cross -portfolio.  
CHAIR:   I understand that's correct, yes.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 19 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Secretary, as part of the Future Made in Australia package, can you advise the committee 
what measures fall within the Employment and Workplace Relations portfolio?  
Ms James:   I will ask the relevant people to come to the table. As you've noted, there are measures across a 
number of departments.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, you've got a $22.7 billion package and I want to tease out what are the measures falling 
within this portfolio.  
Ms James:   Understood.  
Mr Gilliland:   I am just bringing up the relevant measure in Budget Paper No. 2. We have a couple of items 
contained within the Future Made in Australia: workforce and trade partnerships and the Renewable Energy 
Superpower industries measure. This includes $91 million over five years and an additional $0.6 million over 
three years  and an additional  — 
Senator CASH:   So an additional  $91 million  over five years?  
Mr Gilliland:   From 2023 -24, and an additional $0.6 million over three years from 2028-29 to support the 
development of the clean energy workforce, including through addressing vocational education and training 
sector trainer workforce shortages, and funding new and existing training facility upgrades across a range of clean 
energy occupations. We have $55.6 million over four years from 2024-25 to establish the Building Women's 
Careers Program to drive structural and systemic change in work and training environments. I think they're the 
main ones.  
Senator CASH:   What does that give us as a total for this department?  
Mr Gilliland:   I can do some quick maths for you. In that particular measure it's around $67 million.  
Senator CASH:   And then the total overall of it? We had $91 million over five years.  
Mr Gilliland:   I might have to come back to you on the broader breakdown.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, if you wouldn't mind taking that on notice and including a full profile over the forward 
estimates of each of the figures. Are you able to indicate for each of those measures whether funding is 
departmental, resourcing or administered funds?  
Mr Gilliland:   I can do that.  
Senator CASH:   Brilliant.  
Mr Gilliland:   Do you have the portfolio budget statement with you, or I can read it out to you?  
Senator CASH:   I do, yes. If you could just show me where that is or just read it out for the Hansard  record.  
Mr Gilliland:   There's a mix for this measure of both administered and departmental payments. Administered 
payments, $40,000 in 2023-24, $8.16 million in 2024-25, $17.4 million in 2025-26, $17.8 million in 2026-27, 
departmental payment, $6.4 million in 2024-25, $3.4 million in 2025-26 and $2.8 million in 2026-27. 
Senator CASH:   That's not all of it, though, is it?  
Mr Gilliland:   These are the amounts through the department.  
Senator CASH:   Sorry. That was all through the department?  
Mr Gilliland:   The measure includes amounts for other — 
Senator CASH:   Yes, understood. Just in terms of some of the measures outlined, do they have funding 
budgeted beyond the forward estimates?  
Mr Gilliland:   I believe the budget papers make clear that there are some elements that are ongoing.  
Senator CASH:   Can I get you to provide, perhaps on notice, a profile for the medium term for each of those 
measures?  
Mr Gilliland:   The medium term isn't presented. The measure made it clear: it's $0.6 million over three years 
from 2028-29, so it's a relatively small component beyond the forwards.  
Senator CASH:   I don't know whether you can provide it now, but can you provide the total ASL staffing 
attached to all of those measures that this department will have carriage over?  
Mr Gilliland:   ASL is presented in the portfolio budget statements and in Budget Paper No. 4 at an aggregate 
level. We presented a notional allocation amongst the outcomes, but they're not presented by measure.  
Senator CASH:   Can you take on notice to provide me with the breakdown?  
Mr Gilliland:   We will take it on notice.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 20 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That would be great. The government has also a Future Made in Australia act and Treasury, I 
understand, has the carriage of it. Is there a consultation process currently underway for that legislation and, if so, 
is this department a part of that consultation process?  
Mr Gilliland:   We're probably not the right people to answer this particular question.  
Senator CASH:   I'll ask the secretary : in terms of the Future Made in Australia act, what is the consultation 
process between this department and Treasury?  
Ms James:   There have certainly been conversations about the policies. I'm not sure whether the parts of the 
policy that are in the legislation impact us. I can just spin around and check with the deputies as to whether that is 
an aspect — 
Senator CASH:   That would be great, if you wouldn't mind.  
Ms James:   It would have geared up separately. No, I'm not getting any thumbs up from the team behind. We 
can certainly take it on notice. It might be that people in the department have had conversations with people in 
Treasury about that, but it hasn't involved deputies or hasn't yet at this stage been at that level or that level of 
formality.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Is the government considering any type of, say, secure jobs code as part of that 
legislation?  
Ms James:   I think the secure jobs code is a policy of the government. The time to respond to questions about 
that would be in the workplace relationships part of the hearing.  
Senator CASH:   I'll make a note.  
Ms James:   I note that policy pre -existed the Future Made in Australia announcement.  
Senator CASH:   I've got a number of questions here, but they are quite technical, so I might put those ones on 
notice, because I want to now just turn to some questions in terms of labour hire in the department. My first 
question is about the numbers of staff in the department, both APS and non -APS. Are you expecting those 
numbers to change over the forward estimates?  
Ms Jenkins:   There are lots of numbers here, so I'll give you some bits and pieces and then we can unpack 
them. I'm just trying to think of where the best place is to start. Should we start with the headcount of APS 
employees. I'm happy to give this to you in a different format later on if that's easier. Our APS employees as at 31 
March 2024 —we tend to do these on a quarterly basis —was 4,153 people.  
Senator CASH:   What's the definition of 'people'?  
Ms Jenkins:   I don't think I've ever been asked that.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of full time or part time? Is that a full headcount?  
Ms Jenkins:   They are all of those things.  
Senator CASH:   It is a fair question.  
Ms Jenkins:   It is a fair question. If I split that down, 94 per cent of that number, 3,902, are ongoing , and 251 
are non -ongoing. These are APS staff, so that's six per cent, to give you an order of magnitude. Of those, 3,568 
are what we would classify as full time, and then the balance, 585, are what we would classify as part time.  
Senator CASH:   So 585 are classified as part time. That's of the APS?  
Ms Jenkins:   That's of the APS.  
Senator CASH:   Non-APS is our next one?  
Ms Jenkins:   Non-APS I would define in two ways, if you're thinking about non-APS. I'm using the 
definitions from the strategic commissioning framework. I think that's a good place to start with those definitions.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Jenkins:   In terms of our total non -APS, there are 780.  
Senator CASH:   As at the same date?  
Ms Jenkins:   Yes, it is as at the same date. If I could just split those down —I think we've had this discussion 
before —we have what I would call the labour hire, and we split that into ICT, which is our IT people, and just 
remembering, for the benefit of the committee, that we service a number of other departments. The Department of 
Employment and Workplace Relations is a service provider to others, including the Department of Education, et 
cetera. That's why we have a large ICT area. That is 576, our ICT labour hire, and that accounts for 74 per cent of 
that number. Then 192 of those are non -ICT labour hire, which is about 25 per cent. In a minute I might move to Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 21 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Sladic, because that number has trended down. We've had a number of conversions in that space. We have 12 
who are identified as contractors. Just to recap, we have our APS employees, we have our non -APS employees 
and of those non -APS I've given you three categories, using the strategic commissioning — 
Senator CASH:   ICT, non -ICT, contractors?  
Ms Jenkins:   ICT labour hire, non -ICT and contractors.  
Senator CASH:   Excellent. Of the non -ICT—if you don't have it, take it on notice —in terms of the breakdown 
over the department of where they work?  
Ms Jenkins:   I do have that. I'll let Mr Sladic answer.  
Mr Sladic:   As at 31 March this year, of the 192 non -ICT labour hire workers, the majority are in our 
Employment and Workforce Group, about 125, who are mainly in our digital call centre, and we're in the process 
of converting some of those at the moment; about 30 non -ICT staff are in our Corporate and Enabling Services 
Group, which Ms Jenkins looks after; about 25 are in the Skills and Training Group; seven are in the Workplace 
Relations Group; and five are in Jobs and Skills Australia.  
Senator CASH:   Brilliant. Thank you so much for that. In terms of the portfolio budget statement, am I correct 
in saying that the department is getting an extra 377 APS staff in the next financial year?  
Mr Sladic:   I think that's correct in terms of the movement from last budget documentation through to this 
budget. It's about that number as the budgeted ASL.  
Senator CASH:   And additional too, that come on as additional?  
Mr Sladic:   In terms of budgeted ASL? Yes. A lot of that will relate to some of the new measures that are 
outlined in the budget. In particular, a reasonable amount of that is to support the staffing in our call centre, which 
is also detailed in the budget document.  
Senator CASH:   Is there a dollar value for the 377 staff in terms of the cost?  
Mr Sladic:   I might take that on notice just to get you an accurate figure, if that's okay.  
Senator CASH:   That would be great. Again, is there any further clarification in terms of where those staff 
will be located? You said the majority will be in the digital call centre?  
Mr Sladic:   A reasonable number of them are in the digital call centre. I think some of them are also related to 
new measures. There's a —I will get the language right.  
Ms Jenkins:   While Mr Sladic is finding that information, I will just  clarify , because language is important 
here, that when we talk about a digital call centre it's not like IT digital. This is part of the Employment and 
Workforce Group. They have a call centre to respond to the needs of the community. That is the call centre we are 
referring to when we talk about the digital call centre. I'm sure the person who is coming up to the table now can 
talk about it. That was set up a few years ago. It was relatively small and did use a number of what we would refer 
to as outsource providers. We are in the process now of bringing those on as APS staff. That is why you will see a 
movement in the department from funding for non -APS staff to funding for APS staff and there's work underway. 
Does that help to give you context?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. I understand that.  
Ms Jenkins:   I will just check with Mr Sladic if he has the answer to your question.  
Mr Sladic:   I will call out some of the other items. On the First Nations prison to employment program, we've 
also got some departmental funding. One of the measures touched on that in the budget, as well as in relation to 
some of the net zero work we're doing. It might be better if I take that on notice to get you an accurate figure. A 
large part of that is relating to the call centre work.  
Senator CASH:   So a large part goes to the call centre. Are there any in the employment services side of the 
portfolio?  
Ms James:   The digital services delivery centre is in the employment side of the portfolio. That is the 
significant number of this ASL cohort. Ms Rishniw, Deputy Secretary of Employment and Workforce, can give 
you a bit more detail.  
Ms Rishniw:   The Secretary is right; the digital contact centre is a fundamental part of our employment 
services delivery. It delivers our Workforce Australia online component and this budget includes a significant 
recognition of the work that they do and the sorts of calls they take. Ms Catelli can work you through the specific 
staffing. We've done a lot of work in converting what were previously labour hire contractors to APS staff. We 
have a balanced approach to make sure that we can respond to the volume of calls as they go up and down.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 22 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That actually was going to be one of my questions, in terms of the labour hire used by the 
department, but then how many have also now been converted to ongoing APS staff?  
Ms Rishniw:   Ms Catelli can work you through the numbers, but certainly in the last 18 months we have 
converted 102 of what were previously labour hire contractors to APS ongoing staff.  
Senator CASH:   Can I get you, on notice potentially, to take us through the cost of doing that and in 
particular, obviously without identifying any individuals, the salary they were on as labour hire and what they are 
now on within the department?  
Ms Rishniw:   We'll take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   I knew you couldn't do it. That's fine. But 102 have been converted? How many labour hire 
contractors are currently in the department?  
Ms Jenkins:   I will take you to 31 March, because that's the reference we're using.  
Senator CASH:   That's the date we're using.  
Ms Jenkins:   The total number of labour hire workers by headcount —let's call them people —is 768, which 
just to give you an order of magnitude is 16 per cent. If I can give you maybe some relativity, on 31 July 2022, 29 
per cent of our overall workforce was labour hire. So we've reduced it from 29 per cent to 16 per cent.  
Senator CASH:   That's by transfer, and there are cohorts within that, over to APS roles?  
Ms Jenkins:   There'll be a variety of things that would have happened there. Some of it will be, as Ms Rishniw 
said, the transition of the contact centres. Others will be in other areas of our department. For example, I know 
that we've been moving people within our IT area who might be doing non -specific or specialised jobs to APS 
jobs. It might be that we've just changed the work that we do over that period and so their services are no longer 
required, remembering that often labour hire is for surges in particular pieces of work that we're doing. There will 
be a range of factors that would have contributed to that.  
Senator CASH:   I was just seeing if there's any other information that was going to come. Sorry about that.  
Ms Catelli:   I don't have a further breakdown specifically on the ASL versus contractors in the contact centre. 
Obviously, as you would appreciate, our remit is to try to get everyone ongoing as much as possible, but we're up 
against labour force shortages across Australia.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of a discussion we had last time, has the department updated any levels of pay for 
any labour hire contractors in order to comply with same job, same pay laws?  
Mr Sladic:   Not to my knowledge. I think, particularly as I touched on last time, under the people panel we 
have access to hourly rates. I know there's a process we're going through at the moment just to check the hourly 
rates for those staff against their enterprise agreement. To my knowledge, there's been no need to update. That 
process is one that we're certainly working through and hoping to finalise in the coming month or so, well ahead 
of November's commencement date.   
Senator CASH:   Going back to those who are engaged on short -term contracts, what is the shortest length for 
a person engaged on a short -term contract and what is the longest term for someone engaged on a short -term 
contract?  
Mr Sladic:   I'll answer that for you. It's a slight update to what we provided in the QON. As at 31 March, 
across all labour hire workers in the department, the shortest time was 43 calendar days and the longest was 781.  
Senator CASH:   That was 43 calendar days and 781, did you say?  
Mr Sladic:   Yes, 781.  
Ms Jenkins:   I want to clarify. I think I'm correct, Mr Sladic, in saying that's the length of their engagement. 
They may be at, say, 200 of the 781. When you enter into the contract, it might be for X period of time, but there 
could be a reason you don't end up using those particular individuals for the whole amount.  
Mr Sladic:   Using the whole amount, correct.  
Ms Jenkins:   Just to be clear — 
Senator CASH:   Understood. What I might get you to do on notice is to provide a breakdown of all of the 
short -term contracts in terms of the number of days of engagement. How often have these contracts or are these 
contracts rolled over?  
Mr Sladic:   To my knowledge, I'm not aware of that so I'll have to take that on notice for you to give you the 
exact data.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 23 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   I'm assuming I'll be able to work this out, but it might be easier for you to do this. How many 
of these contract workers worked for the department for more than three months? What is the total cost to the 
department of its use of labour hire?  
Mr Sladic:   I can try to help you there. With the first part, as at 31 March, 686 of our labour hire workers had 
worked for the department for more than three months. In terms of the cost, which was another area we answered 
on notice last time, to 31 March the total estimated cost to the department of labour hire workers was 
$130,800,000. That includes a reasonable amount, as Ms Jenkins referred to, that we eventually recover from 
agencies we provide work for through our IT work.  
Ms Jenkins:   Just to clarify that, we are providing services to another agency and we are using labour hire, for 
example, in doing that. We would then effectively cost recover in whatever the appropriate way to do that is.  
Senator CASH:   Is there a permanent ICT team in the department?  
Ms Jenkins:   Yes, there is.  
Senator CASH:   How many are part of the permanent ICT team?  
Ms Jenkins:   I will just step back for a moment. In our department, we have two areas that we would refer to 
as ICT. One is what we refer to as TSD. They look after the laptops, the hardware, the servers —that sort of thing. 
There's a group in there and they would have a large element of APS staff and then they have some other staff to 
perform specific functions, et cetera. Then you have another area which is called the Digital Solutions Division. 
That's called DSD. They look at platforms and they design the digital solutions for our clients, both for clients of 
our department and also for clients of other agencies. Again, that's an area where we had probably more of the 
labour hire framework, using the strategic commissioning framework language. We have been reducing that. We 
can get some of those breakdowns for you.  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind?  
Ms Jenkins:   Absolutely. I can assure you that we have a large contingent of APS workforce to deliver the ICT 
service , but there will always be an element where we need both surge and very specific capability. You can 
imagine with some of this IT language and programming, there are a number of programs that you use where you 
have very few people who have that knowledge. Maybe it would be best if we get that information for you.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Where does that sit —the employment that the service providers use? Does that sit 
within that second group?  
Ms Jenkins:   Yes, correct.  
Senator CASH:   At the February estimates we heard:  
… new labour hire contracts for non -ICT labour hire contractors go through the Department of Finance's people panel . 
Ms Jenkins:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   What is that process? Also, how does this department help the Department of Finance ensure 
its compliance with the new workplace laws, in particular around the use of labour hire?  
Ms Jenkins:   That's a great question and we have some information. One of my colleagues will come up, but I 
will start. You are right; we spoke last time about the Department of Finance people panel, and that people panel 
commenced on 7 August 2023. It is mandatory for us as a department to use that particular panel when we are 
entering into new labour hire agreements.  
Senator CASH:   Just for this department or departments across  the board?  
Ms Jenkins:   For departments across  the board.  
Mr Sladic:   Correct, yes.  
Ms Jenkins:   However, the people panel does not include labour hire workers for the ICT or digital roles. This 
is because that actually goes through the DTA's panel. I might pause there and see if Ms Gamal would like to 
provide additional information. To clarify, yes, you are right; there is the people panel, which is the Department 
of Finance, and we have been working with Department of Finance. They have, for example, been looking at the 
hourly rates and giving us breakdowns, et cetera.  
Ms Gamal:   It is mandatory for us to use the people panel, and that commenced on 7 August 2023. That looks 
at anything that would come under our EA. We look at the rates under our enterprise agreement and we use that to 
calculate the contractor's hourly rate.  
Senator CASH:   Is it the exact same rate?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 24 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Gamal:   It is the same rate that we have in the EA plus a loading plus whatever percentage the labour hire 
firm charges on top of that.  
Senator CASH:   Is there anything they don't get in that calculation?  
Ms Gamal:   No, they get whatever an APS employee is entitled to.  
Senator CASH:   I don't think I have any more questions on labour hire. I'm just having a look. Chair, these 
might be better placed in another section. It's on the right to disconnect and the effect on staff and the department.  
CHAIR:   If it is the department , it should be the department —if it is the department itself.  
Ms James:   We have appropriate people at the table.  
Senator CASH:   Are you happy to do it if it's the department?  
Ms James:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   I've got questions on the right to disconnect, which I know are in the next section — 
Ms Jenkins:   We can come back.  
Senator CASH:   but this is specifically in relation to the department. When does the right to disconnect come 
into effect for staff in this department?  
Ms Strangio:   The right to disconnect comes into effect on 26 August 2024.  
Senator CASH:   Have you provided guidance to your department staff about the new right to disconnect?  
Ms Strangio:   At this point in time there is guidance that we're working through in consultation with our staff 
in relation to issues around working hours, leave, flex time —all that operates around working hours and 
attendance. In relation specifically to the right to disconnect, we're still awaiting advice from the APSC about 
APS-wide arrangements and guidance, but we are turning our mind to how that might look in our organisation. 
We are planning discussions with our consultative committee so that we can start to talk to our employees about 
what that guidance may look like and what it may include. We have a general expectation that managers and 
employees are, through the course of their usual and regular conversations, discussing their expectations around 
contact outside of working hours.  
Senator CASH:   You said that work has begun and discussions are being had, can you break that down a bit 
more for us?  
Ms Strangio:   We haven't had the discussions, but we have them planned through our consultative committee 
to talk through what guidance might look like and how it might operate, but we haven't had those discussions yet. 
The discussions we have had are around issues that are not right to disconnect specific, but we do talk to 
managers and staff around the implementation of our new enterprise agreement in relation to working hours 
generally, leave taking and flex time. Those conversations are happening. They're sort of peripheral to right to 
disconnect, but not specifically on that topic.  
Senator CASH:   When do you expect the guidance will be provided to staff, given it's June and it starts, as 
you said, towards the end of August?  
Ms Strangio:   That would have to be a question for the Public Service Commission. We're awaiting their 
guidance centrally.  
Senator CASH:   It's central guidance? I understand that. Have any staff to date given input into how they 
would like to see the right to disconnect work in this department?  
Ms Strangio:   There were discussions during bargaining around that topic. In the general course of discussions 
on right to disconnect, the CPSU put forward some clauses, which we considered and responded to in accordance 
with good faith bargaining requirements. Then the legislation amendments were then proposed around the same 
time we were discussing it with staff. There were no clauses included in our enterprise agreement on that.  
Senator CASH:   There are no clauses as such in the enterprise agreement , but I note that there is legislation 
that will come into play  in any event . What thought has been given to  potential penalties that would be imposed 
on managers , staff et cetera who contact staff after hours when they should be exercising their right to disconnect?  
Ms James:   I think our starting point, as we traversed at the hearing last time, is around the conversations that 
are happening at the local level. Indeed, they're happening now absent the legislative right. As a department, our 
first response is about expectations and conversations about those expectations and balance. In terms of 
consequences, there is a framework now in the Fair Work Act around this, and the people who are going to be 
sitting at the table for the next outcome can talk you through how that operates.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 25 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That's fine. That's not a problem then. How will the new right to disconnect apply to the 
labour -hire staff engaged by the department and, say, those on contracts et cetera? How is that going to actually 
operate?  
Ms James:   I think as a matter of principle, technically, the right to disconnect will apply to any employee as a 
matter of law. From our point of view, these are discussions we would have with all of the people who work with 
us, irrespective of what arrangement they're working under. Ms Jenkins was talking before about our workforce in 
terms of people and then going to the categories that are the work that represent the workplace arrangements that 
cover them. From a cultural point of view, we would have these conversations in teams and with individuals 
irrespective of the workplace arrangement that's in place.  
Senator CASH:   Can you provide on notice any communications that have been sent to staff in preparation for 
the new right to disconnect? Will anyone be exempt from the right to disconnect due to seniority level?  
Ms James:   I think that I would best reserve conversations around how the provision operates to that level of 
detail to the next part of the hearing. The provision does talk about a range of factors that are relevant to 
interpreting this right, and how someone is remunerated and their seniority is relevant to that. No -one is exempt. 
Everyone is entitled to a safe workplace and everyone is entitled to have conversations with their teams and their 
managers around contact out of hours. For us, we would say these conversations are part of conversations about 
hours of work and flexible work arrangements more generally. We wouldn't necessarily be having very distinct 
and separate conversations about the right to disconnect. We would talk about wellbeing; we would talk about 
workload and the like. Nobody is exempt from the law, from the legal part of it.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. To look at it the other way then, every individual employed by the department —
and, as you said, regardless of circumstance in terms of labour hire they would still be part of that conversation —
will have a formal right to disconnect ? It will n ot necessarily  be in place --that's something that you're still 
working through --but they will have that formal right to disconnect at law?  
Ms James:   All employees who are covered by the Fair Work Act will have the right as set out in the Fair 
Work Act , so yes.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. At this point there are still a lot of conversations that are happening, but it's 
being centrally done through the APSC?  
Ms James:   I think what we would say is the formal role is ensuring that Public Service employees have their 
workplace arrangements comply with work laws. First and foremost, it's every accountable authority's role to 
make sure they have systems and controls in place to make that happen. The Australian Public Service 
Commission provides advice on changes to the legal framework in the same way they provide us advice about 
new Public Service Act reforms, for example. At the same time, we are having conversations throughout the 
department about hours of work and wellbeing. Ms Strangio, supported by her team in implementing the new 
enterprise agreement, is having a number of conversations about our formal policies, including formal policies 
that deal with hours of work and work practices and, yes, contact outside of work, which is what the right to 
disconnect applies to.  
Senator CASH:   This is the department that created the right -to-disconnect policy and the legislatio n—
correct?  
Ms James:   We are the department that supported the government in the Fair Work amendments, noting that 
this particular amendment was an amendment in the Senate moved by the Australian Greens party.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, and we will have a lot of questions on that later. My concern with what I'm hearing, 
though, is : despite your  being the department that is responsible for the policy, what are the conversations you're 
having with the Australian Public Service?  
Ms James:   We are having conversations with the Australian Public Service Commission. The next part of the 
program is where you might wish to put questions about that.  
Senator CASH:   Understood.  
Ms James:   You're asking us questions about our workforce right now. I want to assure you we are absolutely 
engaging with the Public Service Commission about that Public -Service -wide advice to ensure that every 
accountable authority is implementing these new rules.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, I understand. I'll leave the rest of the questions on the right to disconnect to the next 
section , on workplace relations. Chair, we just have one more topic in cross -portfolio.  
CHAIR:   How long do you think it will take?  
Senator CASH:   It depends on what the answers are.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 26 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   I respect that. Just give me a rough estimate.  
Senator CASH:   Twenty minutes.  
CHAIR:   We will have a break.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you for indulging me for that time.  
Proceedings suspended from 11:01 to 11:17  
CHAIR:   We will resume the hearing.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Secretary , what's your understanding of the purpose of Senate estimates?  
Ms James:   Senate estimates is a very important accountability mechanism of the parliament.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Anything further?  
Ms James:   I'm sure there are some official words somewhere, Senator, but what I would say is that the 
department takes the estimates process very seriously and it's incumbent on us to come here briefed to answer our 
questions accurately and to the best of our ability.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you aware of the Albanese government document recently tabled in the Senate 
entitled 'Approaches to Senate estimates questions on notice asked of all or multiple agencies'?  
Ms James:   Senator, I became aware of that document. I haven't specifically reviewed that tabled document. 
But I am aware that document exists and versions of it have been provided to my department.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay, but you're not aware of its specific contents?  
Ms James:   Senator, I'm aware that it exists. At one point a version of it was sent to me. I'm sorry ; I can't 
remember exactly when. I recall opening it and having a quick look at the first couple of pages and thinking, 
'Okay, that's what that is ,' and moving on. So I'm aware of it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you aware that the document provides advice to departments and agencies about 
how to answer questions for Senate estimates, including general principles for answering questions, a consistent 
approach to answering questions and a template approach to answering questions? Are you aware of that?  
Ms James:   I feel that the appropriate word that's been used to describe the document is 'guidance'. I'm aware 
that it provides guidance. As the accountable authority, of course it's my role to make sure that we appropriately 
answer any questions that you put on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. So it's just sort of a general —it gives you a bit of a guide to where you'd go, 
not necessarily a specific — 
Ms James:   Senator, I understand that's the purpose of the document.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. Are you aware that the general principles stated in this document are for 
agencies to refer to publicly available information; provide only information required to answer the question; 
refer to previously tabled responses, where appropriate; and refer to another department or agency where 
appropriate? You're aware  that's what the general principles are?  
Ms James:   Senator, if you're reading from the document, I would —none of that surprises me. That would be 
an approach that departments might adopt. We adopt, where appropriate, perhaps some or all of those approaches. 
For example, it's important , to my mind that , where information is publicly available on a website, we point that 
out to the committee and, by referencing that, we ensure that it's consistent with what's on the public record. We 
usually reference questions that we were asked last time if they're the same questions. We want to take a 
consistent approach. If we are to deviate, we only want to deviate deliberately and for a sensible reason. So I 
would say that, when we review draft responses to questions on notice, the thing that's on our mind is to ensure 
we're giving you a clear, accurate and appropriate response to your questions.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay, so you're familiar with it. Can you just give me a date of when you first 
received it or maybe the person that's responsible for it received it?  
Ms James:   My understanding is, and this is partly from reports of estimates last week, that there have been 
different versions of the document. I can ask the team to talk about when we received it. Usually, these sorts of 
communications would go into a corporate inbox. We have a Senate estimates inbox. I think that the 
communications would have initially been directed there.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So you received an email. Was it from PM&C?  
Ms James:   I'll ask Ms Edwards, who is the Assistant Secretary of Corporate and Enabling Services, which 
captures the parliamentary role, to respond to questions about dates and times of emails.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 27 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Edwards:   Yes, we received that advice or that handling guidance from PM&C. The first instance of it was 
received on 21 November 2023 and it was emailed into my team.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay, can you, on notice if you need to, table that correspondence?  
Ms Edwards:   Yes, I can.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you. Secretary, do you concur that these principles, providing short, vague 
and unhelpful answers to Senate estimates, are contrary to government departments and agencies being subject to 
scrutiny, as you were saying, by Australia's democratically elected Senate?  
Ms James:   I'm not going to comment on the guidance and how it lines up with other obligations. I think that's 
a matter for PM&C. I would say that the approach we take or the approach we adopt in our department is to 
ensure we provide appropriate and accurate answers to your questions.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you agree that these principles, if they're designed to not provide the sort of 
detail that we're requesting, directly contradict the government's open by design principles, which are publicly 
endorsed by the Attorney -General?  
Ms James:   Senator, again, I'm not going to comment on the interaction between a document that another 
agency is responsible for and a statement of a minister to whom I do not work. All I can talk to —and I'm very 
happy to talk to —is the approach we take and the approach we adopt in this department to answering your 
questions.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you use the guide that's been provided? Have you used it to provide answers to 
questions on notice?  
Ms James:   We have forwarded the guide or provided the guide to some of our staff. Ms Edwards can talk to 
you about that. What I will say is that, when questions on notice are being reviewed for clearance by me or by my 
deputies, it is not something we keep to hand and reference in that clearance process. I do have to confess that I 
haven't read the entirety of the guide. With questions on notice, I do review some of them directly. What is on my 
mind is making sure I'm giving you an accurate and appropriate answer to your question.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The questions that we've asked by way of the letter that we provided to you before —
do you review the answers for that?  
Ms James:   I do. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We've established when you've received the document. Was it received by email or 
physical copy?  
Ms Edwards:   By email, Senator.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Who sent you the document?  
Ms Edwards:   I'm not sure exactly, but it came from the parliamentary area of PM&C. But, in terms of a 
specific individual, I can't say.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. What did you do with the document once you received it?  
Ms Edwards:   The initial time we received it, we forwarded that document to our COO and also provided it — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you explain that acronym?  
Ms Edwards:   Sorry — 
Ms Jenkins:   That is me. I have two roles. I'm the chief operating officer . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes—of course. I wasn't sure if it was c-o-u-p. 
Ms Edwards:   We provided it to Ms Jenkins' office and we did provide it to some staff in the secretary's office 
at the time, given it was the first time that it was received. We also put a copy of it on the intranet, where we have 
similar guidance around parliamentary processes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. Did you or anyone in your department discuss this document with anyone 
prior to it being provided to you and developed?  
Ms Edwards:   Unfortunately, I actually wasn't employed in the department at the time that this document was 
received , on 21 November. But I don't understand that we had discussed it prior.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is anyone else at the table aware of any discussion between this department and 
PM&C?  
Ms Jenkins:   No. What I would say though, Senator, is that the responses that are in that document are 
consistent with how people have responded to those questions for a number of years, looking back over time. So I Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 28 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  think there have probably been some conversations over a number of years, particularly where they relate to 
questions that have been sent to multiple portfolios. We can check that for you. But I have not had any 
conversations.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If you can, on notice, thank you. I guess what I'm going to is the formation of it. Did 
this department provide any input into its development is what I'm interested in.  
Ms Edwards:   Not that I'm aware of, Senator, but, as Ms Jenkins said, it's not uncommon for agencies, where 
there are questions asked of multiple agencies, to, for example, understand definitions or remit, making sure that 
we're providing consistent information.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. Just going back to preparing questions, whether it's to the letter that I sent and 
that we've now got back or to questions on notice, was the guide used specifically to respond to any of those 
questions?  
Ms Edwards:   As we mentioned, we've provided it to a few individuals in the department and it was put on 
our website. In terms of staff using that or referencing that, I can't speak to that specifically. There are a number 
of questions —I think that's — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Did you or did anyone express any concern at all after receiving this document from 
PM&C? Was there any concern expressed back to them as to how you might use it?  
Ms James:   Senator, I don't believe we would have had any conversations with the minister. Again, what I 
would say is that those who do final reviews and clearance of these responses to you —these responses to your 
questions on notice —are applying those principles of ensuring we have an accurate and appropriate response to 
every one of your questions. I haven't had any conversations with the minister about it. The questions, of course —
the responses are reviewed and cleared in the minister's office.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The trouble I have is that this document advises agencies to give unhelpful answers 
to senators asking questions — 
Senator Watt:   No, it doesn't.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   that is, vague answers which are clearly unhelpful; and refer the question to another 
department or public website rather than being helpful. Will you ensure that your department commits to the 
Senate to give full and detailed answers to questions asked at Senate estimates, including questions on notice?  
Ms James:   Senator, I absolutely commit to providing you with appropriate and accurate answers to your 
questions on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. This document contains a few examples of how to answer questions on 
notice. One relates to ministers meeting with secretaries. It gives an example. The example question is, 'How 
many meetings has the secretary or agency head had with the portfolio minister since the date?' The suggested 
answer is 'The secretary regularly meets with portfolio ministers. ' I'd like to refer to your answer to estimates 
question on notice SQ24 -000096, where you were asked essentially that question. The specific question was : 
'How many meetings has the secretary had with the minister in their portfolio since 1 July 2023? Please provide a 
list of the number of meetings by the minister and the date of the first meeting with each minister. ' Do you 
remember what your response was to this question?  
Ms James:   Senator, I'm familiar with the question and the response because I'm pretty sure you —well, 
perhaps not you. A senator has asked us that question from the first estimates I appeared before, I believe. My 
memory or my recollection is that the response has been consistent in its form from the first estimates that I 
appeared before you in this capacity.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Well, lo and behold, the response that we did get back is exactly what the guide says 
to answer, which is , 'The secretary regularly meets with portfolio ministers as required. ' So you've taken that 
response directly from this secret manual, haven't you.  
Ms James:   No, we haven't, Senator. As I've said — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But it's word for word.  
Ms James:   Perhaps the manual took it from the first questions on notice that we responded to your committee.  
Senator CASH:   I doubt that.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   From every department across all of government — 
Ms James:   As far as I'm aware and from what I — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   all answers are the same, miraculously.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 29 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James:   From what I can tell, the manual that we've been discussing was first a version of it. It was first 
provided to our department in December 2023. While I don't have them all with me, I am very happy to review 
the previous answers we've provided to this question. But when this one came to me to review —this is one I have 
cleared and I do review because it's about me. I hadn't read the guide. I wasn't aware, I don't think, that this 
question was in it. I reviewed it and thought, 'This is a consistent approach we've taken before the committee, and 
the committee hasn't raised any concerns about it. ' I have considered what the department might do to 
particularise those meetings. When weighing up how to respond to this question, I consider my obligations under 
the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act, and that includes the need to ensure that the way I 
direct resources is efficient, effective, economic and ethical. I consider this to be an appropriate response. I 
consider it an appropriate response today. I considered it an appropriate response at the first estimates when it was 
put to me. I'm comfortable that the way we've approached this question has been consistent before the manual was 
provided to us, so it wouldn't be right to say we've copied the manual.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Secretary, with respect, this is a very vague answer. It could have been specifically 
answered. How many staff do you have in your personal orbit?  
Ms James:   Three or four, depending on graduates.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. And they've got access to your diary. How difficult would it be to go back and 
just count the number of times? The Senate is asking you questions , and we're getting back a generic response 
rather than a specific response which was asked of you by this committee.  
Ms James:   Can I talk to what went through my mind the first time I saw this question, just so I can unpack for 
you what I weighed up in reviewing and approving this response. The first thing I thought was that there are a lot 
of meetings that happen with portfolio ministers. I do have two of them. The process of going through the diary 
certainly would be a manual process , and it would require going through every day of the diary. I thought then 
there is the additional issue that sometimes meetings happen —the diary represents a plan for the day or the week, 
and the day of the week doesn't always turn out that way. It's not a record. It's not a record of every meeting that 
you've ever had. Sometimes additional conversations or meetings arise. You have a meeting , and then the minister 
might say, 'Let's have a chat about this now, ' or I might attend a meeting that wasn't originally in the diary 
because someone suggests it when we're at Parliament House or something else that we do. So my capacity to 
give you an accurate and appropriate answer to that question in the detail would require me to apply resources to 
this, and I need to weigh up the alternative possible —the other things people are doing. Of course, I have an 
obligation to the parliament to provide accurate and appropriate answers. I have other obligations, and the 
department has other obligations as well, which we must balance with that. So that is what has been on my mind 
when responding.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you. I haven 't got much time. The open design principles are that information 
held by the government and public institutions is a public resource. A culture of transparency within government 
is everyone's responsibility and appropriate. Prompt and proactive disclosure of government -held information 
informs community, increases participation and enhances decision -making , builds trust and confidence, is 
required and permitted by law, and improves efficiency. Does the vague answer that you provided by saying that 
you just meet regularly with portfolio ministers really align with these principles?  
Ms James:   Senator, I considered it to be an appropriate response that I could give you that was accurate. I'm 
happy to reflect on this for next time. You've singled this one out.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I've got another one.  
Ms James:   I'm happy to reflect on it, because I had thought perhaps to give you a sense of cadence, but 
cadence changes as well —sitting weeks versus non -sitting weeks. Accuracy is very important. To my view, I 
considered it to be an accurate and appropriate way of responding to this question. I'm happy to consider that for 
next time.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I do have another example. We asked a question, in fact, in this letter that I've sent to 
you. It's a recent question relating to interdepartmental committees. The document says on page 7 that if asked the 
question 'What interdepartmental committees is the department /agency a member of ?' it provides a suggested 
response. I'll paraphrase it but come to the detail when I get to your answer. It says : 
An Interdepartmental Committee (IDC) is a common governance body for cross -agency taskforces, where officials from 
representative agencies may discuss work and provide input on deliverables.  
And it goes on. I note that the department was asked to provide this information in relation to SQ24 -000127. I did 
have an example out of the letter as well, but this one's out of the QON. The answer that we got back is basically 
exactly what the guide says:  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 30 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  An Interdepartmental Committee (IDC) is a common governance body for cross -agency taskforces, where officials from 
representative agencies may discuss work and provide input on deliverables.  
The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations is regularly involved in the work of IDCs.  
By their nature, IDCs can be established and conclude their work rapidly as the need arises.  
Secretary, as I look at this, this is just lifted directly out of the government's estimates cheat manual.  
Ms James:   Again, Senator, I think I'd need to check and do some forensic work to be sure. I think that this is 
the way we've responded to this question when we first received it from the committee — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's just straight out of the manual.  
Ms James:   before the manual existed.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The frustration I've got is that we ask questions specifically because we're needing to 
hold the government to account. When we just get vague answers or get an answer like this that's just lifted out of 
the manual rather than coming to specifics that we're after, we're not able to perform our job as a committee and 
as senators.  
CHAIR:   I think we'll take that as a comment.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'd love your response, though, because it's very frustrating.  
Ms James:   Senator, I'm happy to look at this one. What I will say is that we don't have a central register of 
interdepartmental committees that our people are represented on. There are many of them. Some of them are at 
the deputy level and some of them are at different levels. Since I was last in Canberra, I've also noticed a 
proliferation of different forms of cross -agency forums. There are working groups, task forces and what are 
formally called an interdepartmental committees. I'm not sure its definition is as clear as it once was. I'm happy to 
reflect on this. The issue for me is accuracy. When it's not centrally held, it means we have to go out quite broadly 
to ask people, and then accuracy —if people haven't responded or people aren't sure of the categories, it does 
involve a little bit of work. I appreciate that, considering this one in isolation, you might say, 'Well, you've got 
many people in your department; you can do this. ' We do receive a lot of questions on notice. Again, I need to 
consider those questions around the proper use of resources in my department and the need to be economic and 
efficient, so we need to weigh these things up. I'm happy to review this one for next time.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In relation to the letter —I did say I'd come to that —you've used the secret manual 
again to answer a question that was only put to you just over a week ago. This is in relation to the ministerial brief 
turnaround time. The suggested response from the secret manual is , 'The department prepares briefs within agreed 
time frames on a case by case basis. ' Ms James, question 6 of your letter asks you and your department to provide, 
for this committee, 'a list of all ministerial submissions that have been created after 1 January 2024, including the 
area of the department that prepared the submission' —so we're wanting a bit of detail there —'dates submitted to 
both ministers and all assistant ministers, requested signature dates, actual signature dates, and whether the 
minister disagreed with any of the recommendations'. So it's a pretty detailed, specific question. The answer we 
got—well, I might get you to read it out, if that's okay —question 6.  
Ms James:   We have noted that the department prepares briefs within agreed timeframes on a case -by-case 
basis.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Which is exactly as it says in the manual.  
Ms James:   And I think consistent with how we've always answered this question.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's more than just guidance, isn't it? It's more than just a guide for you. You're 
directly lifting from it.  
Ms James:   I'll just check, but this is consistent with how we have answered this question.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But where are the dates? Where are the requested signature dates —the actual 
dates — 
Senator Watt:   Senator, I'm not sure if you were listening to the evidence — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   and whether there was any agreement or disagreement with the recommendations? 
Where's that information?  
Senator Watt:   I'm not sure if you're listening to the evidence, Senator, but unfortunately the conspiracy that 
you're seeking to prove isn't there — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, we've asked a question that goes to — 
Senator Watt:   May I respond without being interrupted?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 31 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   The minister can answer the question and then, even though we're well over time, we are very happy 
to— 
Senator Watt:   You're seeking to prove that the department's answers have in some way been dictated by mere 
guidelines. What the secretary has repeatedly said is that the way they've answered the questions is similar or 
identical to how they've done it before, during and after these guidelines. I'm afraid it's a good attempt, but the 
conspiracy doesn't exist.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'll need to respond to that.  
CHAIR:   This is a final follow -up question.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   There are two parts to this question. The question is: are you just lifting from a 
manual? But the other important point, which is the real, substantive point, is that detailed questions are asked and 
we're expecting detailed answers. Just providing a vague response that just says, 'The department prepares briefs 
within agreed timeframes on a case -by-case basis' —we wanted to know what dates. We wanted to know who. 
You don't give us any of that. How can we do our job? How can we hold you to account? How can the Australian 
public be confident?  
Ms James:   Senator, I consider that we provide appropriate and accurate responses to your questions. In the 
case of this one, this information is not easily extracted from our system in the form in which you've asked it, so 
it's not something that we could easily provide. This is the approach that we have adopted. I appreciate you're 
raising some concerns now. I don't know that the committee has raised concerns about our response to this 
question in the past when we've answered it along these lines.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We didn't have the manual. We didn't see that you were just responding from the 
manual.  
Ms James:   Well, neither did we the first time we answered this question, Senator, because these questions are 
questions that we — 
CHAIR:   I appreciate that we're traversing the question a fair bit. The opposition has a right to return to this 
question when it comes back to their time.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you.  
Senator Watt:   Have we finished corporate or cross -portfolio?  
Senator CASH:   No. 
Senator GROGAN:   I had some questions on the Fair Work Commission's annual wage review that was 
handed down this morning. It's kind of broad and you might say it fitted into corporate.  
Ms James:   Senator, firstly, the corporate folk have been sitting at the table with me this morning and are not 
briefed on that outcome. The appropriate people are the workplace relations people who are scheduled next.  
Senator GROGAN:   Okay, I might hold my questions then.  
Senator Watt:   I can understand your enthusiasm, Senator, because it's a cracker of a decision.  
Senator GROGAN:   Well, actually, maybe I could just quickly ask you a question or two, Minister Watt, 
because I equally was delighted to see the announcement of a 3.75 per cent increase. Maybe you could just give 
the committee a bit of a feel for what difference it's going to make to Australians.  
Senator Watt:   Without taking too many liberties —and we can come back to it in detail in outcome 3 —I see 
that about half an hour or so ago or maybe a little longer the Fair Work Commission has handed down its decision 
on the annual wage review and has awarded a 3.75 per cent increase for workers on the minimum wage and 
awards. Why I'm so happy about that, and I think most right -thinking people would be, is that is a real wage 
increase given CPI was at 3.6 per cent in the March quarter in 2024. This obviously will be paid to Australia's 2.6 
million low -paid workers. Our government —the Albanese Labor government —certainly welcomes that decision 
from the independent Fair Work Commission. We obviously argued in our submission that low -paid workers 
should not go backwards, considering inflation has been at higher levels in recent times. So this is a fantastic win 
for low -paid workers to make sure that their wages are going to be not only keeping up with inflation but also 
slightly ahead of it.  
Senator GROGAN:   While I 've got you, Minister, this morning on Sky News Senator Hume made some 
comments, pre -empting the decision, basically saying that she thought that it would be the worst thing for 
Australians if there was an increase above inflation. Do you have any —that seems a fairly mean -spirited 
comment.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 32 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   Yes, I was pretty staggered to see those comments from the shadow finance minister in the 
news this morning. She did say that, if the Fair Work Commission awarded a wage increase above inflation, 'That 
would be the worst thing for Australians. ' I'm not sure whether any Liberal Party politician has ever met a low -
paid worker, but it shows gross insensitivity for the condition that people are living in. It shows the opposition is 
completely out of touch with the cost -of-living pressures that so many Australians are facing. Of course, our 
government is doing an enormous amount to try to assist people with those cost -of-living pressures, whether it be 
our tax cuts, the energy rebate relief, cheaper child care, cheaper medicines or all the other things we're doing. But 
we need to remember that, when you're thinking about cost of living, you've also got to think about people's 
wages. That is a real factor in people's ability to deal with cost -of-living pressures. So the fact that we've seen a 
real wage increase for the lowest paid workers in the country will go a long way to helping those people to deal 
with the rising cost of living.  
Senator GROGAN:   Because we are talking about the lowest paid workers —we are talking the minimum 
wage and minimum wages in awards here.  
Senator Watt:   That's right.  
Senator GROGAN:   These are people who are struggling to stay afloat when we're seeing the inflation, as 
much as that has moderated, which obviously is good news. Keeping those wage rates ahead of that inflation is 
quite important. How has that played out over the last couple of years, given that we have seen inflation was quite 
high and has started to moderate down now, which is really good news for everyone? The pay increases that 
we've seen at that minimum wage level, how has that panned out over the last couple of years for people on those 
lowest wages?  
Senator Watt:   Obviously, this is not the first time that we've seen a real wage increase for the lowest paid 
workers since the Albanese government was elected. In 2022 our advocacy helped secure a 5.2 per cent pay rise 
for workers on the minimum wage. Last year, 2023, we helped secure a record 8.6 per cent increase. That's a 
substantial increase. I understand that, with today's decision, it will take the minimum wage to $24.10 per hour. 
That is an increase to the minimum wage of $3.77 per hour since Labor was elected a couple of years ago. I 
wouldn't want to pretend that low -paid workers have got it easy —not by any means. But this decision, on top of 
the previous ones, will certainly assist the lowest paid workers in the country to deal with those cost -of-living 
pressures. The only other thing I'd say in relation to Senator Hume's comments is that it indicates that the 
opposition have still not changed their position on low wages. We all remember that, when the opposition was last 
in power, they literally said that low wages were a deliberate design feature of their economic policy. If you've 
got the shadow finance minister in the media today saying that a wage rise above inflation for low -paid workers 
would be the worst thing for Australians, I think we can all see where they're heading if they ever get elected back 
to office. It'll be back to low wages just like last time.  
Senator GROGAN:   It doesn't make any sense to me. I know Senator Hume has spoken endlessly about being 
concerned about cost of living. Do you think she's maybe just concerned about the cost of living for those on 
middle and higher incomes rather than those people who are doing it tough?  
Senator DAVEY:   I'm not quite sure of that.  
Senator Watt:   I can't imagine why Liberal senators and Nationals senators are so sensitive on their record 
about low wages.  
Senator DAVEY:   Real wages are actually behind where they were when you took over. So you can talk all 
you want about — 
Senator Watt:   That's not actually true.  
Senator GROGAN:   Do I still have the call, Chair?  
CHAIR:   As you know, I like to give everyone a bit of a chance to get things off their liver occasionally, but 
there is a question that's being asked by Senator Grogan to Minister Watt.  
Senator GROGAN:   Thank you. Minister Watt, maybe you could give us a history lesson of the last 10 to 12 
years in terms of what we've seen over 10 years of the Liberal -Nationals coalition as it relates to wages across the 
board and the changes that we've seen in the last two years in terms of wages, particularly at that minimum wage 
level but obviously the knock -on effect and the other measures in terms of wages to other members across our 
society.  
Senator Watt:   Thanks, Senator. Not only did wages for the lowest paid Australians go backwards under the 
former government, of course; that also happened across the board. Under the former government, which all three Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 33 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  opposition senators were part of who are here today, wages growth averaged 2.2 per cent —much lower. I'm 
looking for the figure that's happened since Labor took office. I think it's in the order of four. Just bear with me.  
Senator GROGAN:   Inflation, I believe, has gone down.  
Senator Watt:   The Australian Bureau of Statistics wage price index increased by 4.1 per cent over the year to 
the March quarter 2024 —the second highest annual growth since the year to 20 March 2009. I hear the opposition 
scoffing at the suggestion that inflation is coming down. I don't know if — 
Senator DAVEY:   You said 'coming'. Senator Grogan said it has gone down.  
Senator GROGAN:   It has gone down. That is actually a fact, Senator Davey.  
Senator Watt:   I don't know what — 
Senator GROGAN:   It's a fact.  
CHAIR:   Can everyone just stop for a moment. I'd like to hear the minister.  
Senator Watt:   Thank you. Senator, I don't know what fact sheets they distribute at opposition party room 
meetings, but, when this government came in, inflation was above six per cent. It is now below four per cent.  
Senator GROGAN:   Is four lower than six, Minister, just to be clear?  
Senator Watt:   My understanding is that four is a lower number than six. So I would have thought that shows 
that inflation has come down. Opposition senators might scoff at that, but that is what is known in the trade as a 
fact, just like wages going up under a Labor government is a fact. Under the previous government, as I said 
before, average annualised wages growth was 2.2 per cent compared to 4.1 per cent under the current 
government. So the fact is that, under this government —a Labor government —wages are up for the lowest paid 
and across the board. Inflation is coming down and has gone down compared to where it was when we first came 
to office. Jobs growth has continued to surge. Unemployment remains low and, importantly, economic outcomes 
for women are improving. When we get to outcome 3, we could perhaps have a discussion about the other part of 
today's decision, which is very important in terms of the gender pay gap and women's rights in the workplace.  
Senator GROGAN:   That was actually where I was going to go. I know that we're straddling corporate and 
not corporate, which is why I'm addressing my questions to you, Minister. Could you just take us through what 
those findings from the commission were with regard to gender undervaluation in the award system? I think it's a 
really critical area that the Albanese Labor government has been working very hard on in terms of gender pay gap 
and making sure that our industrial relations system recognises the challenges and seeks to improve.  
Senator Watt:   It is, Senator. The context for this, I guess, is that already since coming to office the Albanese 
government has delivered the lowest gender pay gap on record in Australia. Any gender pay gap is too high, but it 
is now lower than it ever has been before, at a record low of 12 per cent in November 2023. We're also seeing 
women's total employment go up. We've seen both part -time and full -time work for women booming over the last 
couple of years.  
On the back of that, obviously, these issues involving the minimum wage are of significant importance to 
women workers. The decision handed down and now funded by our government around aged care workers is 
really important for women. But today the Fair Work Commission has also found prima facie evidence of 
historical gendered undervaluation in the award system. The President of the Fair Work Commission has asked 
for a full bench to review five awards in more detail, with a report before the next wage review. The awards that 
will be affected again involve occupations that are disproportionately held by women. The awards are early 
childhood education and care workers, disability home care workers and other social and community services 
workers, dental assistants, medical technicians, psychologists and other health professionals —all occupations 
predominantly held by women and historically underpaid. This is an important decision from the Fair Work 
Commission to consider that in more detail. This part of the decision would not have happened without the 
Albanese government's secure jobs, better pay laws, which placed gender equality at the heart of the Fair Work 
Commission's decision -making and, of course, which the opposition voted against.  
Senator GROGAN:   We'll be very much looking forward to asking questions in the following sections. Thank 
you.  
Senator CASH:   I have a series of questions for the department just in relation to implementing the workplace 
delegates' rights changes in the department itself, as opposed to the policy side of the equation, which would be 
the next outcome. Does the department have any workplace delegates from the CPSU?  
Ms James:   We certainly do.  
Ms Strangio:   Yes, we do.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 34 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   How many?  
Ms Strangio:   I don't know how many. I can't answer that.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to take that on notice and revert to us?  
Ms Strangio:   I would have to actually ask the CPSU for that information. We don't hold that information.  
Senator CASH:   How do you know, then, if someone's a delegate or not?  
Ms Strangio:   They would be having those discussions with their managers, particularly in relation to 
activities that they undertake.  
Senator CASH:   What do you mean by that?  
Ms Strangio:   Just delegates' activities around consulting and communicating with employees.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Is there no way of the department recording how many delegates that it has so it 
knows who to correspond with et cetera?  
Ms Strangio:   No, we generally have a —we do know who some of them are because they do interact with us 
and disclose that to us, but we generally interact with the CPSU through a lead delegate.  
Senator CASH:   And is that across the department or on a policy -by-policy basis?  
Ms Strangio:   I would say the answer to that is it depends. There are local delegates who would be known to 
local managers and they would be interacting regularly with them, but in relation to whole -of-department 
activities, my team and I might interact with the lead delegate and then information is passed on from them to 
other delegates.  
Senator CASH:   Has the department issued any new policies or procedures for  managers —I'll use th at term, 
but you might use a different term —in understanding their new obligations?  
Ms Strangio:   We have not as yet. We are working in line with the circular that has been issued by the 
Australian Public Service Commission on workplace delegates and on consultation obligations, and it covers the 
range of interactions that I think you're going to. We have been working with the CPSU around establishing some 
protocols for how we might support them in their activities, in line with a whole range of provisions; through our 
enterprise agreement; and in line with the circular that has been issued centrally by the APSC that also sets out 
freedom of association obligations, communication resources and a whole range of matters that support the 
activities that CPSU delegates may undertake in our organisation in a way that also allows us to have some 
appropriate limitations around the use of resources, for example.  
Senator CASH:   If you don't know who they are, how do you put in place appropriate boundaries in terms of 
the use of resources?  
Ms Strangio:   Those protocols would be agreed between the CPSU and us centrally —I'll say me as Chief 
People Officer for the organisation —and we would expect the CPSU delegates, who are our employees, to apply 
those. In circumstances where they don't, that would be brought to our attention. Managers would have access to 
those protocols once they're established. We're still in very early discussion. We have received some information 
from the CPSU on perhaps what they may have applied in other organisations, and we are considering our own 
position on what they've put forward to us. There is nothing agreed and established at this point other than what 
exists centrally through the Public Service Commission.  
Senator CASH:   You referred to the circular that the APSC — 
Ms Strangio:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Are you able to table that on notice for the Senate committee?  
Ms Strangio:   Yes, that is available publicly on the APSC's website, so there's no problem there.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Has training been provided at this point, then, to managers in relation to the new 
obligations?  
Ms Strangio:   Which new obligations specifically are you referring to?  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the workplace delegates.  
Ms Strangio:   But which new obligations are you referring to, Senator?  
Ms James:   Senator, the answer is no. We haven't provided training en masse to delegates. I will say that, 
because we have been bargaining recently and engaging very actively with the CPSU, the issues introduced by the 
closing the loopholes legislation that commenced in December are things that we have been talking to the CPSU 
about. The ongoing discussions that we're having, of course, are forward -looking and will take into account those 
rights as enacted in the Fair Work Act in December.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 35 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   So they're not yet in place, though?  
Ms James:   They have commenced. They commenced in December. For example, under the provisions, 
workplace delegates are entitled to reasonable communication with members and potential members, because that 
is something that was actively discussed in the course of bargaining. And, of course, it's ongoing to ensure that 
delegates are able to engage and communicate with members and potential members. So for us, probably, I would 
like or I would hope that the new obligations are not so far away from what we already implement in the 
department. But, of course, we'll look very specifically at them to ensure that we're 100 per cent reflecting the 
rules. And, of course, any request from a delegate would be received and considered appropriately. For example, 
delegates might talk to their managers about things they're doing. They might be supporting a member through 
discussions with a manager. If there was any issue locally about delegates not being given the time off they need 
to fulfil their duties as a delegate, I would expect that would be escalated via the CPSU to Ms Strangio.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Ms Strangio asked which rights we were referring to. Just to be clear, then, it is under 
the government's closing the loopholes bills. The delegate has the right to represent the industrial interests of 
union members and employees eligible to be union members, the right to reasonable communication with union 
members and employees eligible to be union members about their industrial interests, reasonable access to the 
workplace and workplace facilities for the purposes of representing the interests et cetera and reasonable access to 
paid training leave or paid leave for training, again, for the purposes of representing the interests. Just in terms of 
the paid leave for training, how's that going to be worked out across the department?  
Ms Strangio:   There are already ongoing discussions. I've been having conversations for many years about 
access to paid time to attend training. It is reasonable for us to support a delegate to attend training for the 
purposes of performing their duties as a workplace delegate. It's not leave as such; I could say it's more around 
supporting access to paid time.  
Senator CASH:   So how does that work then? Take me through how it works.  
Ms Strangio:   At the moment, it's an agreement with an employee and their manager. If they need to, it is 
centrally handled through the HR team.  
Senator CASH:   You said it's not leave.  
Ms Strangio:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   If it's not leave then what is it?  
Ms Strangio:   It would be effectively work time, but it is recorded in our HR system.  
Senator CASH:   As what?  
Ms Strangio:   I don't know the exact category. I can take that on notice. But it probably refers to time taken to 
perform union activities or training.  
Senator CASH:   Is that then deducted from —say I'm doing eight hours a day or 7.5 hours a day. Is that 
deducted from that, is it, just to get the categorisations right?  
Ms Strangio:   It's not deducted as such; it is accounted for in that way. If it was an eight -hour day, for 
example, whatever period of time for that day that was taken for that purpose would be accounted for as time 
taken for that purpose, and it would still be an eight -hour day.  
Senator CASH:   So you do account for this within the central system, do you?  
Ms Strangio:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Okay. Is it possible to get then a breakdown of how much leave has been taken —you're not 
going to use the term 'leave' —or paid time to attend training has been taken in the department?  
Ms Strangio:   I'll take that on notice and I'll see you information can be drawn.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Just in terms of the right to reasonable communication, et cetera, will delegates have 
access to departmental systems and mailing lists?  
Ms Strangio:   At the moment, our delegates have access to use our email system to email employees.  
Senator CASH:   So the whole department?  
Ms Strangio:   Yes. 
Ms James:   Well — 
Ms Strangio:   Well, this is the nuance, because we have restrictions on who can email the whole department. 
It's actually not really open to everyone to be able to do that.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 36 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James:   To be clear, Senator , we 're talking now about email groups. Anyone in the department can email 
any individual. They can go into the global address or the DEWR address and they can email the secretary or they 
can email a branch or a group. Delegates may have their own list of members and their email addresses. They can 
use our email system to contact those people who would be on their list —a list they put together. We have a 
whole -of-department email address, if you like. That sends an email to everyone in the department. Very few 
people have access to that. I don't have access to that. If I wish to send an all staff email, it goes through the 
communications folks. I did learn this on, I think, Christmas Eve when I wanted to send a happy holidays email 
and I worked out that I couldn't without someone from the communications area executing it for me. That email 
address is absolutely limited to ensure it's appropriately used. But delegates can use the email system to 
communicate with members and potential members in that they can select individuals to email, and that's 
appropriate.  
Senator CASH:   Just on that, how does the department then ensure that employees, for example, who do not 
wish to be represented by the delegate won't have their information provided to the delegate? If they did receive 
an email, what's the process to say, 'I don't want this ever happening again'?  
Ms Strangio:   The onus for that is on the CPSU to manage.  
Senator CASH:   Tell me how that works.  
Ms Strangio:   I'd have to ask the CPSU how they manage that behind the scenes, but that is the obligation they 
have.  
Senator CASH:   Wouldn't the department want to know that to ensure that the employees are being respected 
within the workplace?  
Ms Strangio:   Yes, that's right. If there is an occasion where someone has continued to receive 
communications despite having requested that they don't receive them any further, we would take that up with the 
CPSU.  
Senator CASH:   On how many occasions would the person need to raise this before it's taken up?  
Ms Strangio:   That would be taken up — 
Senator CASH:   Immediately?  
Ms Strangio:   On the first occasion, I would think.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. 
Ms Strangio:   I do also have just some information on the number of delegates that have been provided, just to 
go back to an earlier question.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you.  
Ms Strangio:   The CPSU notified staff on 18 March 2024 that there were 32 CPSU delegates in our 
organisation. I don't have an update since that time, though.  
Senator CASH:   How's that split over the organisation?  
Ms Strangio:   I don't have that information.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to get that?  
Ms Strangio:   I would have to ask the CPSU for that information.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Does the department plan on facilitating collective meetings for the workplace 
delegate —or delegates, now that we know that there are 32 of them?  
Ms Strangio:   We don't facilitate meetings of delegates. That is for the CPSU to facilitate. We have regular 
meetings with the CPSU and with our lead delegate and any others that would join those meetings and in some 
cases a union official. We also have representation of the CPSU on our consultative forum that meets regularly, 
and we also have other subject -specific interactions with the CPSU, and relevant delegates might attend those as 
well.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of reasonable access to the workplace and workplace facilities for the purpose 
of representing the interests et cetera of employees, what facilities and system is the department intending to make 
available to the workplace delegates?  
Ms Strangio:   Generally, that will be things like reasonable access to emails, to the use of telephones, to 
meeting rooms or to other public areas that a CPSU delegate might use to consult with and communicate with 
employees. It might be specific to whatever circumstance. For example, we might make a Teams channel for a 
virtual meeting available. It just depends on the particular type of interaction that the CPSU wishes to have with Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 37 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  our staff, and we would consider the reasonableness of that, including things like paid -time meetings, when they 
occur and how long they go for.  
Senator CASH:   What's a paid -time meeting?  
Ms Strangio:   A paid -time meeting is where an employee attends that meeting with the CPSU in their usual 
work time rather than their own personal time. Usually the case is that it would be during a lunch break or 
personal time for particular meetings. But there have been occasions —for example, during bargaining —where it 
is appropriate for us to provide access to a limited period of paid time for our employees to attend meetings with 
the CPSU.  
CHAIR:   Before we go to the next question, I'll just indicate that once we go through this line of questioning 
we'll go to outcome 3.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. There aren't  any more, and I think the rest of them I might —there are quite a few, but I 
can put them on notice and I'll try asking some of them in the next section as well. I will just finish this section 
then. Can I just go back to how the department is implementing the workplace delegates' new right to reasonable 
access. It's called here paid training leave. What do you say you prefer to refer to it as?  
Ms Strangio:   I guess it's a form of miscellaneous leave, if we want to be technical about it, but it really is 
access to paid time to attend delegates training, and that has been a longstanding — 
Senator CASH:   So there are no actual changes then in terms of how the department facilitates this based on 
the new legislation?  
Ms Strangio:   No. In my experience, across the APS and not just in this department, we have paid time to 
attend training, however it's described, as legal or otherwise. That has been reasonably provided in the past as 
well.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of that, what is considered reasonable? Is there an upper limit on how much 
leave can be taken?  
Ms Strangio:   That is a million dollar question. It is about what's reasonable. For example, if an employee 
wanted to take two weeks off to attend training, that would probably be considered unreasonable. But it tends to 
be—I've asked this question, so we've been trying to get some information on it, but it really depends on the 
nature of the training and how much. It might be a half day, which could be considered reasonable. Access to that 
training and to attend training also needs to —we would be asking managers to make decisions on what is 
reasonable based on what the operational requirements are. For example, if someone was in a rostered 
environment in a contact centre then it might not be as reasonable to have half a day or a day out as it might be for 
someone in another area. But if it can be accommodated and it is a reasonable request then we would expect that 
it would be agreed to.  
Senator CASH:   Can I get you then to take on notice for me, in terms of requests for paid training leave, given 
this has already been in place in the department over the last, say, 12 months, a comparison —how many requests 
for the training leave has the department had and how many days in total has this actually equated to. In terms of 
understanding whether or not the leave is actually relevant to the workplace, etcetera, what is that process?  
Ms Strangio:   Relevant to the workplace —I will just check this with you, because relevant to the workplace in 
this scenario is that it is relevant to them undertaking their role as a workplace delegate in our workplace. So I 
think that's probably the relevance. But if you're looking for a line between the relevance of that training and their 
day-to-day duties, which might be financial processing, for example, that would be a bit more difficult to draw.  
Senator CASH:   But you're saying the relevance is to them undertaking their work as workplace delegates?  
Ms Strangio:   That's right.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Again, on notice, has the department refused any requests and, if it has, why and on 
what basis? Does the department already facilitate or intend to facilitate workplace delegates to speak to eligible 
employees about joining a union?  
Ms Strangio:   Do we already — 
Senator CASH:   Do that?  
Ms Strangio:   Speak to employees about joining?  
Senator CASH:   Or intend on facilitating workplace delegates to be able to talk to employees about coming on 
to join the union?  
Ms Strangio:   We do, in limited circumstances, already provide access to that. We don't have regular induction 
sessions, for example, where a union delegate may come along and provide information about joining, which is Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 38 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  legitimate activity. We do, however, have organised induction group sessions for our graduates, for example. 
There is a 15 -minute time at the end of the day on one of the induction days, when graduates have just 
commenced, and they are given the option of not staying if they choose not to.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. I'm happy to put the rest of those questions on notice so we can move on to the next 
outcome.  
CHAIR:   Thanks.  
[12:24]  
CHAIR:   We'll now go to outcome 3, workplace relations. I just want to table three documents. One is headed 
'IR policy erupts after Liberal Party leak', and I refer to the article from last week titled 'The Coalition IR policy 
will slash wages'. The article exposes a secret letter recently sent by Senator Cash to the director of the New 
South Wales Liberal Party, Mr Richard Shields, about the Liberals' secret workplace relations plans. The second 
and third documents that are the subject of that reporting are a copy of the Liberal Party's IR policies set out at the 
agenda of the New South Wales Liberal Party annual general meeting and a letter from Senator Cash expressing 
her strong support for those policies, describing them as 'several good ideas that align strongly with the coalition's 
approach'. I want to go to the matters set out in the Liberal Party policy document under the subheading 'Proposed 
reforms to the current industrial relations system'. The first of the Liberal Party's proposed reforms is to abolish 
the better off overall test. Minister, can you explain what the better off overall test does and specifically how it 
protects workers from being paid below legal minimums and the consequence of any alternative policy suggested 
in these documents?  
Senator Watt:   Thanks, Chair. I think it might be best if we get some of the content experts at the table to 
answer factual questions. Obviously, we shouldn't be asking the Public Service to answer anything political in 
nature, but if it's simply seeking an explanation of what the better off overall test is, I suspect there'd be people at 
the table who are probably better qualified to answer that than me.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Minister.  
Ms Godden:   Senator, the better off overall test is contained in section 193 of the Fair Work Act. It provides 
that, for a non -greenfield agreement, the test is passed if, at the test time, the Fair Work Commission is satisfied 
that each award -covered employee and each reasonably foreseeable employee for the agreement would be better 
off overall if the agreement applied to the employee than if the relevant modern award applied to the employee. 
Section 193A provides that, in applying that test, that is a global assessment for that employee, so it's not a line -
by-line assessment for that employee. For each relevant employee, they have to be better off overall under that 
agreement than they would have been under the relevant award.  
CHAIR:   So, Minister, if the better off overall test was abolished, which is part of the Liberal Party's secret 
policy document set out in these leaked documents, would it be possible for millions of Australian workers to be 
paid less than the legal award minimum?  
Senator CASH:   Chair, with all due respect, I'm more than happy for you to have these games played and 
that's not a problem at all, but that is a complete mischaracterisation of what is in the letter.  
CHAIR:   Minister, would you like to go to these documents. They're leaked documents —they're secret 
documents. They weren't handed out to the public.  
Senator CASH:   Chair, on what basis is it a secret document?  
CHAIR:   Would you be able to go to the consequences of the better off overall test if that was abolished? This 
is a very clear question about the possible effects for millions of Australians to be paid less than the legal award 
minimum.  
Senator Watt:   Thanks, Chair. Just in answering your question, I know Senator Cash is objecting to us 
scrutinising what she is proposing would occur under a future coalition government.  
Senator CASH:   Chair, with all due respect, as I said, I am prepared to have all of this aired because this is all 
part of the estimates process, playing some games. But, Minister Watt, you are verballing me and that will not be 
allowed.  
Senator Watt:   I don't think it is games at all to be talking about reducing workers' pay and conditions and 
saying that they shouldn't be better off overall, which is what that test is all about. Let's be clear about — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do not mischaracterise what is in the letter.  
Senator Watt:   what we're talking about here. Senator Cash, on 8 May, wrote a letter to the state director of 
the New South Wales division of the Liberal Party, having received a letter from him. She thanked him for his Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 39 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  letter regarding the recent motion from the industrial relations policy branch, carried at a recent Liberal Party state 
council meeting and providing her with a copy of a document entitled 'Principles of Liberal industrial relations 
policy'. We've got a copy of that policy that was endorsed by the state council of the Liberal Party in New South 
Wales and that was clearly leaked by someone to the media. In her letter, Senator Cash says to the state director 
of the Liberal Party in New South Wales, 'I sincerely appreciate' the suggestions contained in the document 
'Principles of Liberal industrial relations policy ' from the New South Wales Liberal Party's IR policy branch —and 
this is the critical quote —'which includes several good ideas that align strongly with the coalition's approach to 
industrial relations'.  
If you then look at that proposed framework, which was provided to her, which Senator Cash says aligns 
strongly with the coalition's approach to industrial relations, it proposes reforms to the current industrial relations 
system that the better off overall test for enterprise agreements should be replaced by a no disadvantage test; that 
the approval requirements for enterprise agreements should be simplified; that awards should no longer apply to 
high income earners; simplification of unfair dismissal; and that individual flexibility arrangements should be 
made more effective. So, Chair, I would suggest that it is completely in order to be asking these questions about 
what the impact of removing the better off overall test would be on workers, given that is one of the several good 
ideas that, according to Senator Cash, align strongly with the coalition's approach to industrial relations. The 
documents are there for all to see —they've been tabled. In answer to your question, Chair, your question is what 
would be the impact of abolishing the better off overall test. It's pretty straightforward. Australian workers would 
not be better off overall when they're coming to enterprise agreements. They'd go backwards. We know that's 
what — 
Senator DAVEY:   You wouldn't go backwards because it says 'no detriment'.  
Senator Watt:   Well, if you're interested, Senator Davey, we can get an explanation of the difference between 
the two and why it's important for Australian workers to have the better off overall test in place.  
CHAIR:   I'd really encourage any objections when it's your opportunity to ask these questions, including 
differing views on this document and what the effect of policy is. When it gets to your opportunity, I'd certainly 
encourage you to ask questions. Back to this point of the means of workers. We've just seen evidence given this 
morning about the shadow minister, Senator Hume, talking about the disquiet, the displeasure and the lack of 
desire to see a wage increase from the commission today which lifted wages so importantly.  
Senator CASH:   Chair, again, with all due respect, that is verballing  what the senator has said . 
CHAIR:   I want to go to this question. I'm paraphrasing. That quote is — 
Senator CASH:   You are paraphrasing.  
CHAIR:   The consequences of what Senator Hume said — 
Senator CASH:   We're concerned about inflation and the impact on Australians.  
CHAIR:   What Senator Hume was saying is that, quite clearly, not only are wages potentially going to go up 
too high because people going to get a wage increase that would be effective but also this simple question of 
getting rid of the BOOT would further disadvantage some of the most disadvantaged people within this country. 
Now, these are tough times. How do you fight cost of living if you're opposed to decent wage increases and if 
you're opposed to —and you want the better off overall test to be abolished and lower wages when wage increases 
take place? The minimum wage has to affect cost of living. Minister, what's the compounded effect of both the 
assertions this morning from Senator Hume and the BOOT being abolished for millions of Australians?  
Senator Watt:   Thanks, Chair. Well, the short answer is that Australians would go backwards. We know that 
there is a fundamental difference between the two parties of government on these issues. Our government —a 
Labor government —is about helping workers earn more and keep more of what they earn. We've seen in the past, 
and we're now seeing repeated by new announcements from the Liberal Party, that they want people to work 
harder for less. You're right, Chair. This morning, the shadow finance minister is in the media referring to a 
possible decision from the Fair Work Commission, which we've now received, saying that, if we saw a wage 
increase above inflation for the lowest paid workers in the country, 'that would be the worst thing for Australians'. 
We've already seen the shadow treasurer on Insiders  in February this year saying, 'We'll certainly take a targeted 
package of repeals to the next election'. Up until now, they haven't been willing to talk about what those repeals 
will be. Well, now it is becoming clear, through this letter that Senator Cash sent to the Liberal Party, which 
talked about repeals — 
Senator CASH:   Let's talk about small business — Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 40 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   of the better off overall test, changes to unfair dismissal, and award changes, which she says 
aligns strongly with the coalition's approach to industrial relations.  
Senator CASH:   Reversing the impact of Albanese's legislative changes.  
Senator Watt:   Senator Cash can sit here today —she's got a lot to say over there right now. She could make 
every Australian worker much more comfortable in their future by ruling out the repeals that the New South 
Wales Liberal Party has put forward and which she said strongly aligned with her approach and the coalition's 
approach to industrial relations. So if they're not going to repeal the better off overall test, let us know. If they're 
not going to simplify approval requirements in enterprise agreements which would disadvantage workers, let us 
know. If they're not going to change unfair dismissal laws in a way that disadvantages workers, let us know, 
because at the moment what we know is that the Liberal Party is going to take a 'targeted package of repeals' to 
the next election and that Senator Cash said that all of these ideas align strongly with the coalition's approach to 
industrial relations.  
CHAIR:   That goes to this question about the Liberal secret policy document that also calls for a massive 
expansion — 
Senator CASH:   You've just tabled it.  
CHAIR:   of individual flexibility arrangements, which are, of course, a rehash of the old workplace 
agreements. The policy document complains that these agreements are currently 'largely unworkable' because 
they tend to fail the better off overall test, which, as we've just discussed, Senator Cash also supports abolishing.  
Senator CASH:   Chair, again, you have these games to play, but I will not be verballed — 
CHAIR:   Minister, what are the dangers posed to Australian workers by the secret plan to return to individual 
workplace agreements that don't even have the basic protections of the BOOT?  
Senator Watt:   Again, that would send workers backwards at a time of serious cost of living pressures on 
Australians. It would contribute to wages going backwards and conditions going backwards, which is exactly the 
way Liberal governments have always operated in this country.  
CHAIR:   I've seen earlier this year the Federal Court fined the Commonwealth Bank a record $10 million for 
wage theft which took place through these individual flexibility agreements that pay below the legal minimum 
award rate. Minister, would the Liberals' plan to massively expand these agreements across the economy result in 
more people's wages being stolen?  
Senator CASH:   Chair, with all due respect, as I said —and we went through this last time —we're now in this 
ironic space of getting questions on the alleged policies of the opposition which are not our policies. I'm happy for 
you if you want to have some fun with this but not to verbal me, please, and certainly not to verbal the policies of 
the coalition.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash, you are more than welcome during your period to direct questions to the minister if 
you feel that there's been misrepresentation either in questions or in answers.  
Senator CASH:   There's definitely been misrepresentation.  
CHAIR:   But we clearly know that, in this particular case, the Federal Court fined the Commonwealth Bank a 
record $10 million for wage theft which took place through individual flexibility agreements that paid below the 
legal minimum award rate. Minister, to massively expand those types of agreements across the economy —would 
that result in people's wages being stolen?  
Senator Watt:   The short answer is yes, and those cases demonstrate the case. As you say, that's a case where 
one of the largest companies in Australia was fined the largest amount ever for wage theft after knowingly 
underpaying thousands of staff. That was facilitated through these individual flexibility agreements. I hear 
Senator Cash objecting to your questions and trying to now run a million miles from what she said in her own 
letter. Senator Cash, that's your signature on that letter.  
Senator CASH:   Standing up for small and family business.  
Senator Watt:   No-one required you to sign a letter that said you welcome these ideas as aligning strongly 
with the coalition's approach to industrial relations.  
Senator CASH:   Why do you hate small and family business so much?  
Senator Watt:   You can't complain about being verballed when what we're doing is reading out your exact 
words from your own letter.  
Senator CASH:   You clearly don't care about small and family business.  
Senator Watt:   Verballing is when you make something up. These are your words.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 41 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   We can go to the policy issues that would affect change that happens within and look at the 
particular policies that the government has and the effects of those policies and proposed changes. The secret 
policy document also calls for — 
Senator CASH:   It's not secret.  
CHAIR:   award rights and protections to be ripped away from every worker earning more than $99,216. That 
could include nurses, teachers and workers on building sites, factories, mine sites and workplaces around 
Australia, and truck drivers. What are the sorts of protections commonly found in awards which would be ripped 
away by this plan?  
Senator Watt:   The fair work website talks about the sorts of entitlements that are included in modern awards, 
which it seems Senator Cash and the coalition now want to rip away. They include things like pay, hours of work, 
rosters, breaks, allowances, penalty rates and overtime. So not only do we have workers in general targeted by the 
opposition, according to the words of the shadow treasurer, but also now we know, according to Senator Cash, 
that it's entitlements such as pay, hours of work, rosters, breaks, allowances, penalty rates and overtime that are in 
the gun as well. No -one made Senator Cash do this.  
Senator CASH:   You're now just making it up.  
Senator Watt:   No, we're not making anything up, Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   You are now just making things up.  
Senator Watt:   Are you saying someone's forged your signature on this letter?  
Senator CASH:   Standing up for small and family business.  
Senator Watt:   By cutting wages, changing hours of work, cutting rosters, cutting breaks, cutting allowances, 
cutting penalty rates and cutting overtime? Is that what you're about?  
Senator CASH:   Now you are really making things up.  
Senator Watt:   Senator Cash, is that not your signature on that letter?  
Senator CASH:   Again, you're really starting to make things up.  
Senator Watt:   It's on your letterhead, Senator: the Hon. Michaelia Cash. I don't know of anyone else with that 
title. That's your signature on that letter, which welcomes these IR ideas from the New South Wales Liberal Party 
and you say they align strongly with the coalition's approach to industrial relations.  
Senator CASH:   Standing up for small and family business.  
Senator Watt:   At any time, you're welcome to disown these ideas, but actually, you're doubling down there. 
What you're doing is doubling down and saying that these are Liberal Party policies. She's saying that she's 
standing up for small business.  
Senator CASH:   Standing up for small business.  
CHAIR:   I'm sorry, but I have my time. I've given excessive amounts of time to everybody else, which is 
reasonable. I want to see that you can make sure you're able to complete them. I try to do that every time I'm in 
estimates. I have some more questions to ask. The Liberal secret policy document also calls for unfair dismissal 
laws to be simplified. The document even complains that too many dismissals are found to be unfair by the Fair 
Work Commission due to factors such as procedural fairness, harshness, et cetera. Now, what sorts of protections 
around harshness and procedural fairness do Australian workers currently have from being unfairly dismissed, 
Minister?  
Senator Watt:   Given that's a factual question, it might be best to put that one to the department, Chair.  
CHAIR:   I'll put it to the department then. What protections around harshness and procedural fairness do 
Australian workers currently have, and from being unfairly dismissed?  
Ms Godden:   Section 385 of the Fair Work Act defines an unfair dismissal. It provides that a person has been 
unfairly dismissed if the Fair Work Commission is satisfied that the person has been dismissed and the dismissal 
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable; the dismissal was not consistent with a small business fair dismissal code; and 
the dismissal was not a case of genuine redundancy. If you turn to section 387, there are further provisions in the 
Fair Work Act around the criteria for considering harshness. There's quite a useful summary on the Fair Work 
Commission's website that I tend to refer to, which gives some examples. A harsh dismissal might be an extreme 
response to the situation or where there's a disproportionate impact on the employee's economic and personal 
situation. An example of an unjust dismissal is where an employee is not guilty of the action or behaviour that 
was the reason for the dismissal. For an unreasonable dismissal, the example the Fair Work Commission gives is 
that the evidence does not support the decision.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 42 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   Can we return to the minister. If all these unfair dismissal protections are abolished, which is the 
Liberals' plan, according to the leaked policy documents, what would the impact be on millions of workers around 
Australia?  
Senator CASH:   Now we're going into Monty Python -esque — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So we'll take every policy in Australia — 
Senator CASH:   We're now Monty Python -esque.  
CHAIR:   What would the impact be on millions of working Australians, as much as they want to interject 
because they've been exposed, of a secret policy outcome and strategy to wipe out the rights of millions of 
Australians? What would be the impact?  
Senator Watt:   Well, it would mean that a lot more workers could be sacked without having any recourse. 
That's what it would mean. You might remember, Chair, also, that one of the changes the Labor government made 
was to change the number of employees that a business has to avail themselves of some of these provisions. It 
would open up to workers in a lot more businesses the risk of being unfairly dismissed. Now, I know we hear 
these repeated interjections and scoffing every time you refer to this being a secret document or a leaked 
document. I don't remember them ever going out publicly to the Australian people. Fortunately, someone in the 
New South Wales Liberal Party obviously was concerned enough about this that they decided to leak it to the 
media because otherwise we wouldn't know what the coalition's policy is. What we know or what we knew was 
that they, according to the shadow treasurer, were going to take a targeted package of repeals to the next election. 
We did learn on budget reply night that Mr Dutton wants to strip protections away from millions of casual 
workers. They've been upfront about that one. But what we've now learned is that their plans go a lot further.  
CHAIR:   This goes to an important point about the Liberals' secret leaked policy document. It calls for the 
better off overall test to be abolished, for awards to be abolished for millions of workers, for unfair dismissal laws 
to be weakened and for individual work choices agreements to be promoted across the country. Minister, taken as 
a package, what does this say about the Liberals' plan for our economy and are low wages still their priority? How 
does that compare with the Albanese government's record in this area?  
Senator CASH:   Chair, with all due respect, we've gone back to where we were at last estimates. It's a very 
Monty Python -esque approach. Questions are being asked on non -existent coalition policy and an answer is being 
given by the minister. Really and truly, Monty Python couldn't script this if Monty Python tried.  
CHAIR:   No, actually, Monty Python wrote the letter under the name 'Michaela Cash' and the Liberal Party of 
New South Wales were the scriptwriters.  
Senator Watt:   Look, I'd be pretty embarrassed if I'd signed a letter like this as well, let alone if it saw the light 
of day.  
Senator CASH:   Standing up for small and family business.  
Senator Watt:   Well, you can stand up for small and family business without cutting workers' pay.  
Senator CASH:   Standing up for small and family business.  
Senator Watt:   You can stand up for small and family business without ripping away people's ability to take 
action if they're unfairly dismissed.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   This is an awful amount of time to spend on a policy that doesn't even — 
Senator Watt:   You can stand up for small business by not getting rid of penalty rates. You can stand up for 
small and family business by allowing people to be paid overtime.  
Senator CASH:   The hypothetical impact of hypothetical policies.  
Senator Watt:   Funnily enough, it turns out there are ways that you can stand up for small and family business 
without disadvantaging their workers as well. But that would require a little bit of creativity, a little bit of lateral 
thinking and a little bit of going beyond the dogma that has dictated the Liberal Party for aeons. Senator Cash, it 
might be embarrassing, but they're your words.  
Senator CASH:   Hypothetical impacts of hypothetical policies.  
Senator Watt:   'Several good ideas that align strongly with the coalition's approach to industrial relations'. 
We're starting to get a bit of flesh on the bones about what the targeted package of repeals the shadow treasurer 
was talking about when he was on Insiders  a couple of months ago. In answer to your question, Chair, taken as a 
package, these measures that Senator Cash, in her own words, says strongly align with coalition policy —
abolishing the better off overall test, abolishing awards for millions of workers, weakening unfair dismissal laws, 
and promoting individual workplace and work choices type agreements —will deliver the low wages that the Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 43 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  coalition, when they were last in government, said were a deliberate design feature of their economic policy. So 
it's back to the past. It's back to the bad old days when wages were growing at very low rates and were basically 
stagnant forever under the Coalition. We've finally reversed that as a result of the laws that a Labor government 
has passed that were voted against by the Coalition, that are delivering wage rises above inflation, delivering the 
smallest gender pay gap we've seen in history, giving millions of Australians a better standard of life, creating 
more jobs than any first -term government in Australian history, and delivering lower inflation. I would have 
thought that's the kind of economic policy you'd want. But, instead, the coalition wants to take us back to the bad 
old days and cut people's wages.  
CHAIR:   In fairness to the coalition, I'll now return to the coalition. They may wish to ask some questions 
about these documents as well.  
Senator Watt:   Senator Cash might like to clarify which of these ideas do not strongly align with coalition 
policy.  
Senator CASH:   No, but I would like to talk about the $60 million given to the ACTU via the PET Fund.  
Senator Watt:   I'd love to talk about that too, because you're actually wrong. So let's talk about that.  
Senator CASH:   Well, you seem to want to ask questions, so go for your life. It's a very strange process.  
Senator Watt:   I saw your attempt to stitch up the government on this, but you are factually wrong. What 
actually happened is that the budget approved — 
Senator CASH:   $60 million —the highest —when it was actually a spend within the department to give out to 
your PET Fund.  
Senator Watt:   And do you know who received that money, Senator Cash?  
Senator CASH:   A number of employer associations under the guise of giving it to the ACTU.  
Senator Watt:   But you just said it was $60 million to the ACTU.  
Senator CASH:   A great way to give out money by the —I do like the way it's called the PET Fund, though, 
because it's definitely a pet fund to funnel money to the unions.  
Senator Watt:   That'd be the fund that existed since 2011 and throughout your government? Didn't you like 
the name of it?  
Senator CASH:   2011, under your government. Funny, that, isn't it.  
Senator Watt:   And it remained in place until 2022. So you didn't think to change the name of the PET Fund 
while you were in government?  
Senator CASH:   We will go through an entire breakdown of the money.  
Senator Watt:   I'd love to do that.  
Senator CASH:   Secretary, is it true that this was actually the largest spend in the portfolio in terms of new 
budget items?  
Ms James:   Senator, that doesn't sound right to me.  
Senator Watt:   So just to clarify, Senator Cash, while the department officials are looking for that information, 
you began this line of questioning by talking about the $60 million that this government is giving the ACTU. I 
take it you now concede that it's $30 million going to the ACTU, with the other 30 going to four employer groups, 
being the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Australian 
Industry Group, and COSBOA, the small business organisation. Do you concede what you said was wrong?  
Senator CASH:   So the largest chunk to the ACTU —$30 million to be paid to the ACTU.  
Senator Watt:   It's called this concept of equal treatment. I know that's a concept that you struggle with in IR. 
It's $30 million to unions through the ACTU and $30 million to employers. If you'd like us to exclude one of the 
employer groups and leave them out, just let us know. But we would have thought that it would have been a fairer 
idea to provide the same amount of money to unions and employer groups.  
Senator CASH:   Can I just confirm, in terms of the budget measures, is that the largest spend in the portfolio?  
Ms James:   No, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   So what was the largest spend in terms of the budget items?  
Ms James:   Senator, I don't have the budget measures listed from highest to lowest, but I can tell you, for 
example, that First Nations prison to employment program is a total of 76.2 million. I suspect that's — 
Senator CASH:   That's within outcome 3.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 44 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James:   You asked about the portfolio.  
Senator CASH:   Well, within this part of the portfolio.  
Ms James:   Sorry, I just took the department.  
Senator CASH:   We're in a separate part of the portfolio. That's this afternoon, in the other part of the 
portfolio. We're looking at this part of the portfolio.  
Ms James:   Understood. So, just to be clear, I look across the entire department's operations when I — 
Senator CASH:   And I'd like to, because then we could jump everywhere. But we're not allowed to, because 
we're actually put in place to certain parts of the portfolio at any particular point in time.  
Ms James:   It's a good point but not in this section.  
Senator CASH:   Otherwise you could jump all over it.  
Ms James:   You could have asked that question —I will ask Mr Manning to address the workplace relations 
spends. I will say that there weren't a lot of large workplace relations spends in the budget, although there have 
been previously.  
Mr Manning:   The $60 million over the forward estimates is the largest contribution over the forward 
estimates. But just to make sure we're in the workplace relations part it, I'd just make sure we are comparing 
apples with apples. There are some other measures which are smaller over the estimates, which provide ongoing 
funding. I'm thinking about some money that went to the Fair Work Ombudsman for the employer advisory 
service and large corporate underpayments, whereas this $60 million is over the four years.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, a bit over the four years. Just in terms of the $60 million, what muddling has the 
department done to ensure that the fund does actually increase productivity across the Australian economy?  
Mr Manning:   The aim of the Productivity, Education and Training Fund is to enhance tripartism in 
workplace relations. Essentially, the additional funding is designed to reflect the substantial amount of reform in 
workplace relations and to enable those organisations to engage with their members about those reforms, educate 
and support them to understand and implement them, and, in doing so, contribute to the workplace relation 
systems generally. There is no additional forecasting in relation to expected productivity increases.  
Senator CASH:   So the purpose of the fund is not to increase productivity?  
Mr Manning:   No, the purpose is, but you asked the question about additional forecasting. The basis for it is 
that, if businesses and employees are able to engage with the workplace relations systems effectively and there's 
an increased tripartism in relation to the workplace relation system and increased engagement, that will flow 
through to increases in productivity.  
Senator CASH:   But they engage in any event, even without the 60 million.  
Mr Manning:   It's about the effectiveness of the engagement in a situation where there's been a great deal of 
reform and a great deal of change. It's about enabling them to understand and deal with that change as quickly and 
effectively as they are able to.  
Senator CASH:   But they've been engaging for decades —long before this fund was actually put in place.  
Mr Manning:   I don't think it's right to view the fund in context of no engagement and this is what gets 
engagement. As you say, there is engagement. This is about increased engagement with changes in circumstances 
where there have been substantial changes since the government came to power.  
Senator CASH:   So in terms of the word 'productivity' in the title, what is the word 'productivity' there for if 
there's been no modelling undertaken to determine how the engagement will increase productivity?  
Mr Manning:   I think there is a reflection that the greater the understanding and hence engagement, the more 
efficiently the system will operate, and that will be able to improve productivity.  
Senator CASH:   How will you measure that?  
Mr Manning:   In relation to the changes generally, the government has committed to reviews of the 
substantial reforms that it's undertaken. I would envisage that the PET Fund could be looked at as part of that. 
Otherwise the — 
Senator CASH:   Well, will it be? You envisage it, but will it be? It is $60 million. That's what I'm trying to get 
at. How does the taxpayer know they're getting $60 billion bang worth of their taxpayer buck and they're not just 
getting a vibe?  
Mr Manning:   We're at the situation where the money is being provided in the budget. We still need to roll out 
the grant fund. As part of that, there'll be requirements established in relation to reporting, et cetera. That will Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 45 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  occur as it's rolled out over time and then assessments will be done that the recipients have complied with their 
activity statements over the time of it. But, as I say, more broadly, the government will conduct reviews into the 
impact of its changes, and I think those two things together will enable us to judge the effectiveness of the fund.  
Senator CASH:   How quickly is this going to be rolled out in terms of the grant funding? What stage are you 
at there?  
Mr Cains:   Sorry, Senator, would you mind repeating that question?  
Senator CASH:   We talked about the grant funding being rolled out. My question was: how quickly is this $60 
million going to be rolled out? What's the process from here?  
Mr Cains:   Senator, we're still working out the details of how the funding will be implemented, whether that's 
an extension of the current guidelines or whether new guidelines will be established. But the funding will flow 
from the 2024 -25 financial year.  
Senator CASH:   The funding will flow from the 2024 -25 financial year?  
Mr Manning:   That's right. If you look at the last commitment of funding, I think it took a month or so. It 
might have been in July 2023 when the first amount of funds released. There's a process that has to be gone 
through whereby parties will be invited to seek expressions of interest to bid, noting that, for example, the 
Business Council of Australia didn't take up the opportunity before. They may wish to take up the opportunity this 
time. Mr Cains spoke about consideration of whether the grant guidelines remain the same or are updated in any 
way. We'll go through the grants process and then there'll be a need to —I spoke about activity statements, et 
cetera, before. We'll need to settle those and then the funding can rise from there. So we think that — 
Senator CASH:   So you'll do that over the next four weeks?  
Mr Manning:   Well, we'll get a good start over the next four weeks. I think it'll take a bit longer than four 
weeks. For example, if the Business Council of Australia, which is not a current recipient, decides to be one then 
it adds a complication that may not exist in relation to those who are already receiving grants funds, which could 
be administratively simpler. I would have thought over the next four to eight weeks we'd be doing the majority of 
that work.  
Senator CASH:   And then that is rolling out how much of that funding from 1 July?  
Mr Manning:   At this stage we can't say how much will be rolled out from 1 July, but I think we'll be doing a 
lot of that work between now and 1 July. In previous years it was after 1 July that the first amount of money 
actually flowed. It was probably six weeks. Actually, I think it was mid -July that it flowed in previous years.  
Ms Maddock:   I can say that, of the $60 million in the budget announcement over four years, for 2024 -25 that 
funding allocation will be 7.5 million.  
Senator CASH:   So 7.5 million?  
Ms Maddock:   Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. And then what's the profile of the funding going forward after that?  
Ms Maddock:   Again, for just the 60 million budget announcement?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, it's just the $60 million.  
Ms Maddock:   It's $17.5 million in 2025 -26; $17.5 million in 2026 -27; and $17.5 million in 2027 -28. 
Senator CASH:   And that gives us the total of $60 million.  
Ms Maddock:   Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Can you take me through what the KPIs under the current fund are?  
Ms Maddock:   Currently, under the grant agreements, grant recipients have drafted and agreed with the 
department an activity work plan, which goes through what activities they will be delivering over the course of 
the grant period, in line with those outcomes that Mr Manning was speaking about further. So, in terms of what 
those things might be and in terms of enhancing tripartism with their members and the government, that might 
include things such as consultation with government processes, law reform processes and probably, particularly 
now, the implementation phase. But it's also in terms of engagement with their own members. That could be 
setting up their own committees and working groups to work through policy development issues, legislative 
reforms that are on the cards, and implementation and things like that. There is the other side of it, which goes to 
the education and training activities that these grant recipients will undertake to assist their members to 
understand and take up the government's reforms. All of that's reflected in the activity work plans. Then progress 
against those activity work plans is required twice a year. They send progress reports through to the department, Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 46 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  which are reviewed and signed off by the delegate. I can say that, in terms of when funding is then provided for 
the next financial years, it is dependent on satisfactory progress against those activity work plans.  
Senator CASH:   Has satisfactory progress been made under previous iterations of the activity guidelines?  
Ms Maddock:   To date, we've received one round of an activity work plan progress report. That was in 
February this year. The next one is due in August. The department reviewed the February progress reports and 
determined that there had been satisfactory progress.  
CHAIR:   We'll now suspend the hearing.  
Proceedings suspended from 13:04 to 13:50  
CHAIR:   We will resume the hearing. We'll continue with officers from the department in relation to outcome 
3, workplace relations.  
Senator WATERS:   Ms Wallbank, I remember you were very helpful last year. It's probably your area that I'll 
be asking about. When we last spoke in February, I was asking about funding for the existing three working 
women's centres . At that point funding for them had been delayed. Can you give me an update, please, on where 
the existing working women's centres funding is at?  
Ms Wallbank:   Yes, I can. Last time I forgot to bring my glasses , and I've done it again. That's okay. It's not 
that detailed, so I can just tell you. The existing Working Women's Centres grants round did go out for 
applications after the last estimates session. That was published on 13 March. That process has now been largely 
completed. The recipients have been advised of the outcome , and all the funding agreements are final.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay. When will that become public?  
Ms Wallbank:   I would say in the next week or so it will go up on GrantConnect.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay. But the relevant parties are aware of where things are up to. Can you reveal the 
quantum of the funding that's been granted?  
Ms Wallbank:   Yes. That's very detailed, so I'll get that read that out for me.  
Mr De Silva Wijeyeratne Wijeyeratne:   For existing working women's centres , in Queensland, the total —I'll 
read out the year -by-year breakdown. That's what I do have. In Queensland in 2023 -24, it is $1,171,756. In 2024 -
25, we have $1,347,143. In 2025 -26, it is $1,522,723. In 2026 -27, it is $1,522,723. In 2027 -28, it is $1,240,318. 
In the Northern Territory, the amounts are in 2023 -24, $756,499; in 2024 -25, $931,740; in 2025 -26, $1,107,101; 
in 2026 -27, the same amount again —$1,107,101 —and in 2027 -28, $931,136. Then in South Australia in 2023 -
24, $873,912; in 2024 -25, $874,073; in 2025 -26, $874,312; in 2026 -27, $874,312; and in 2027 -28, $757,963.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay, thanks very much for that detail. Just a query: why do they all go down in the final 
funding year?  
Ms Wallbank:   That's because the ongoing funding for the program is $8 million per year ongoing, but we've 
added to it in the initial years because of unspent funds in 2022 -23. 
Senator WATERS:   And you just smoothed that out over all the other — 
Ms Wallbank:   Over those four years, yes.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay. Why were they unspent in 2022 -23? 
Mr De Silva Wijeyeratne Wijeyeratne:   That's because the grants program hadn't commenced yet. The grants 
program —the funding was provided for 2022 -23, but the grants program hadn't actually commenced because the 
grants rounds hadn't been run. Therefore, in recognition of the fact that the grants rounds have only been run in 
this financial year, that funding had to be rolled over into subsequent financial years.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay. Was there any loss of staff as a result of that delay in the getting out the door of 
the money?  
Ms Wallbank:   Not that we're aware of. I guess the rule of thumb with grant funding and any government 
funding is that we advise that people don't assume that funding will be coming to them until it actually is in a 
funding agreement.  
Senator WATERS:   Speaking of funding agreements, you said they have now been completed. When will the 
centres receive the first instalment of their money that you just outlined for me?  
Ms Wallbank:   I can't tell you the exact date of when the money will land in their account, but they know that 
they will get funding this financial year. Whatever their costs are that are associated with the program from now 
onwards, they'll be able to use that funding for them.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 47 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator WATERS:   Thank you. Can I ask now about the other two grants that pertain to the working women's 
centres in capitals where they don't already exist, as well as the national proposed representative body. I've got the 
GrantConnect details here, so I'm across the timeframes and the amount. Can you just confirm for me that they're 
both closed now and that you received applications under each of those?  
Ms Wallbank:   Yes, that's correct.  
Senator WATERS:   Are you able to reveal who applied under each of those?  
Ms Wallbank:   I don't think we can say who applied. What if I talk about the first round and then the second 
and then the national body, because they're quite different. For the new working women's centres —that's where 
there weren't already centres in the jurisdiction —the process has been basically completed , and we're just 
finalising funding agreements with the successful recipients. That's for New South Wales, Victoria, ACT, WA 
and Tasmania.  
Senator WATERS:   Did you say WA?  
Ms Wallbank:   Yes. 
Senator WATERS:   Are they all the same organisation , or are they different organisations?  
Ms Wallbank:   Who were successful?  
Senator WATERS:   Yes. 
Ms Wallbank:   It's a variety. Some of them were just one organisation site. There were a couple of 
consortiums as well.  
Mr Manning:   They're different in every jurisdiction.  
Ms Wallbank:   Okay. I'm sorry ; I didn't understand what you meant. No, they're different in each. Each 
jurisdiction has a different organisation that will be running the work and working with the centre.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay. When will the identity of those organisations be announced?  
Ms Wallbank:   In the next few week or so we're expecting to put that on GrantConnect.  
Senator WATERS:   Do any of the successful tenderers have existing links with the three existing working 
women's centres ?  
Ms Wallbank:   I'm not 100 per cent sure. I'm just trying to think back to —obviously in their applications 
they— 
Ms James:   Senator, I think , while we're still finalising negotiations, we wouldn't normally talk about the 
characteristics of the organisation. I appreciate we are in the final stages of the negotiations over the funding 
agreements, but we wouldn't normally talk about the characteristics of organisations or do anything to disclose 
their identity ahead of those funding agreements being settled. It might be better —and I appreciate the patience of 
all those involved —to wait for a formal announcement with respect to that one.  
Senator WATERS:   Thank you. Can I just ask for about the funding profile. I understand it's 26.8 and so on 
over the four years. Is that going to be shared equally between the five jurisdictions?  
Ms Wallbank :  No. The funding amounts were decided as part of the consultations that the department did to 
develop the governance and funding model. The numbers are based on the size of the population and the need. 
Anshu has the numbers for each jurisdiction, if you would like them. He can read them out, or we can put it on 
notice.  
Mr De Silva Wijeyeratne:   I think it might be easier to put the whole set of numbers on notice, but I can speak 
you through the approach that was taken in terms of setting the quantum for each jurisdiction, if that would be 
helpful.  
Senator WATERS:   I do want to know the answer, but only if it won't take too much time. But I am 
particularly interested in your comment about the assessment of need, because in other contexts there isn't an 
assessment of unmet need. So I am very pleased to hear that you have some method of quantifying unmet need. 
So could you please talk to me about that.  
Mr De Silva Wijeyeratne:   In terms of the way the funding allocations were determined, there was a base 
amount of funding —this is for the individual working women's centres —of $420,000 for every single 
jurisdiction. Then any additional amounts on top of that $420,000 was set having regard to two key factors. One 
was demand, which is a broad measure of how many women in each jurisdiction may need to access a working 
women's centre, so that is like just for the population of working age women. Then there is a servicing cost, which Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 48 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  factored in the cost of servicing different communities in urban, outer regional, remote and very remote areas. We 
use ABS data to inform that modelling.  
Senator WATERS:   Given the time, because I do have some other questions, could you please provide me, on 
notice, some more detail on how you measure that demand? Was it simply how many women of working age 
there were or were there some other parameters that you looked at? And just in the few minutes you have left, 
could you take me to the second round now please —the one that is for the national representative body?  
Ms Wallbank:   Yes. The first two rounds happened concurrently and then the national body process a little bit 
later. And the main reason is  that was by invitation only, so one of the criteria of being invited was that you were 
successful in one of the first two rounds, so obviously we needed to know who was successful before we could 
put those invitations out. Basically, the department has assessed applications and we are planning on advising 
applicants themselves in the coming days. So I probably can tell you the least about that one, sorry.  
Senator WATERS:   The quantum of money I think is clear. Is the funding that will flow each year the same 
amount or is that funding in the lumpy delivery format?  
Ms Wallbank:   It is similar to the others, so that one is a little bit easier. It is $600,000 per year from 2023 -24 
until we get to 2027 -28, and it is $400,000 then.  
Senator WATERS:   How many folk are you envisaging that will support in the national body? How many 
staff are you anticipating a successful organisation will populate that with?  
Ms Wallbank:   Interesting question. The funding model envisaged that it would be approximately two staff. 
However, the applications were pretty varied and I'm not sure we can narrow it down like that.  
Senator WATERS:   I think you said you will advise applicants next week. When will I be able to find out 
who has successfully got that one?  
Senator WALSH:   Basically, we can make it public after the funding agreement has been signed.  
Senator WATERS:   That is the next week thing, is it?  
Ms Wallbank:   That is down to the department, but also the recipients. Sometimes it takes a while for them to 
sign the application because they might have to chat with their board, depending on what the situation is there.  
Senator WATERS:   So roughly a month away?  
Ms Wallbank:   I'm hoping it will be mid -June. As I said, it is dependent on a few factors.  
Senator WATERS:   Okay. Can I just confirm that the not -for-profit nature of the applicants remained a core 
criterion?  
Ms Wallbank:   Yes. 
Senator WATERS:   Okay. Thank you very much.  
Senator CASH:   I will just turn back to the PET fund. We were going through the funding profile and also the 
activity work plans. Going back to when the fund was created, was that in 2011?  
Ms Maddock:   Yes, Senator. The previous PET fund was announced, I believe, in the 2011 -12 budget.  
Senator CASH:   Just remind me, what was the funding back then?  
Ms Maddock:   I believe it was $20 million. I wasn't involved in that.  
Senator CASH:   Approximately $20 million?  
Ms Maddock:   $20 million, I believe.  
Senator CASH:   Over what period of time?  
Ms Maddock:   That program, I believe, ran from 2012 and was finalised in 2022, but I think part of that was 
extensions that were required due to the impact of COVID.  
Senator CASH:   So that was 10 years. Was that because the money was allocated in 2011, the full $20 
million? How was it actually distributed out?  
Ms Maddock:   I do not have those details on me. I can take that on notice, Senator, but I believe that the 
funding was provided to grant recipients in — 
Senator CASH:   In advance.  
Ms Maddock:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   So was any further funding post the $20 million provided until we get $60 million?  
Ms Maddock:   Again, I can take that on notice in terms of the previous PET funds.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 49 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Manning:   In relation to the original one, my recollection is that there wasn't. However, there was the next 
iteration of the PET funds, if you like, which is the current one, for which funding was provided. There have been 
two lots of funding provided. Ms Maddock has taken it on notice, and I would have to as well. My memory isn't 
that good. But I think in relation to the original one there were some extensions given, in the sense that at least 
one of the parties hadn't spent all of the money so they were allowed to roll it over for a short — 
Senator CASH:   Yes, but it was from the original $20 million? There was no new money.  
Mr Manning:   I don't think additional money was given, up until this second iteration, if you like.  
Senator CASH:   Which you have announced in the October 2022 -23 budget.  
Ms Maddock:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   In terms of the 10 years of funding, how did the department monitor the funding that was 
actually being given out?  
Mr Manning:   I think we would have to take it on notice for a specific answer, but it was similar in the sense 
that there were still activity statements provided for every year which were assessed at the end of the period.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'the end of the period' is that the 10 -year period?  
Mr Manning:   No, no. The end of every year or half year. That is the type of detail that I would have to take 
on notice.  
Ms Maddock:   I do understand that there was a reporting framework set up under that grant.  
Senator CASH:   I might get you to —on notice, obviously, table a copy of the reporting framework.  
Mr Manning:   For the previous iteration?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, the previous iteration. Yes absolutely, thank you. But also, would it be the same 
reporting framework for the new $60 million?  
Ms Maddock:   The PET fund commenced in July last year, July 2023, and under that a performance and 
monitoring framework has been set up for the current arrangements. So this additional budget measure will feed 
into the framework that has been established under the current PET fund.  
Senator CASH:   That has already been established, right. So when we spoke of the BCA before, Mr Manning, 
and you said the BCA hadn't taken funding last time, how does that tie in with the July 2023 date?  
Mr Manning:   I was going to clarify that, Senator, in the sense that I might have been a bit ambitious. It is just 
that there have been two iterations of funding under the current one — 
Senator CASH:   And what do you define as the current one, just so we are on the same page?  
Mr Manning:   The October 2023 -24— 
Ms Maddock:   October 2022 -23, which was the original announcement of $5.06 million.  
Senator CASH:   $5.06 million, yes.  
Mr Manning:   Then $20 million in May 2023 -24. And that was all rolled out in July, so I was hoping that it 
would take us about the same period of time, but over the lunch break Ms Maddock clarified for me that we had a 
query in relation to whether or not we were able to roll it out or need to redo it. So once we get that advice it will 
help us determine a more accurate time frame.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of why you would need to redo it, what do you mean by that?  
Ms Maddock:   Just working through the details of what is the most appropriate way to implement this budget 
measure to make sure we are meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth grant rules and guidelines.  
Senator CASH:   Why would they change? I am assuming they haven't changed.  
Ms Maddock:   Just in terms of the period in which the funding is being provided for is being extended under 
the budget measure, and you may have seen in the budget announcement there is also the inclusion of information 
education to be provided on payday superannuation.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Maddock:   So it is just making sure that we understand what our obligations are under both the 
Commonwealth grant rules and guidelines, and our existing PET fund grant opportunity guidelines.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the education part of the fund, what does that actually entail?  
Ms Maddock:   Grant recipients are able to undertake and deliver to their members in the broader community 
education activities to help their members understand and implement the government's workplace relations 
reforms. That can take the form of specifically industry -focused workshops, guidance that can be provided to Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 50 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  members. It can be broad -ranging communications campaigns. Grant recipients have a number of activities that 
they will undertake.  
Senator CASH:   It has not been assessed by ASQA or anything like that? There is no formal requirement 
around the education component?  
Ms Maddock:   It is around aligning activities that would support their members to be able to understand, 
embed and implement the reforms.  
Mr Cains:   Those activities need to be outlined in activity work plans which the recipients report against twice 
yearly and are assessed by the department. The education activities need to, of course, comply with the grant 
opportunity guidelines, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   Is it possible for you to table copies of the activity plans that you do have?  
Ms Maddock:   Yes, we could take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the training part, what are examples of training that can be undertaken?  
Ms Maddock:   Grant recipients, from reporting that we have seen against the activity work plans to date, have 
been undertaking training programs on specific workplace relations reforms that have come in since the 
government came in place. That can be to train up their members to go out to workplaces to explain and help 
them implement the government's reforms. Examples I can remember off the top of my head have been such 
things as understanding what the gender equality changes have been and some of the bargaining changes as well.  
Mr Manning:   For example, you might train an industry association so that the industry association can go out 
and educate their members. That is one of the activities.  
Senator CASH:   And when I see the activity plans, that will give me a better understanding of what the 
different recipients actually do with the funding.  
Ms Maddock:   That's right. The activity work plans outline the deliverables and activities that they will 
undertake, how they will go about doing that and the grant expenditure that they apply to those activities.  
Senator CASH:   Going back to the funding, in 2011 -12, the funding was fully allocated, and it was allocated 
over the period of time that you articulated. In terms of this $60 million, it is allocated over four years, $7.5 
million, $17.5 million, $17.5 million, and $17.5 million. Okay. In relation to funding given in 2022, was it?  
Ms Maddock:   Are you talking about the original budget announcement in October 2022 -23? 
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Maddock:   That announcement of the $5.06 million and the $20 million announced in the may budget last 
year were all put together for the current grant agreements that are in place.  
Senator CASH:   But the $60 million is on top of that?  
Ms Maddock:   Correct.  
Mr Manning:   And it is phased a bit in the sense that the original money announced in 2022 -23 flowed from 
2023 -24, through to 2027 -28. The second amount, which was $20 million, just flowed over 2023 -24 and 2024 -25. 
Senator CASH:   So only over two years.  
Mr Manning:   That's right. And then this one flows from 2024 -25 through to 2027 -28 as was outlined earlier.  
Senator CASH:   So the $60 million picks up on where the other funding would have otherwise ended?  
Mr Manning:   Well, this year —2024 -25—there is $1688 million from the original grant $10 million from the 
second lot and $7,500,000 from this third lot. And, as of next year, that $10 million from the second lot of funding 
falls away; it no longer exists. So there is $1688 million from the original grant and $17.5 million, as Ms 
Maddock outlined earlier.  
Senator CASH:   Is there a possibility that there would ever be money left over, or is the money allocated?  
Mr Manning:   The money is allocated — 
Ms Maddock:   Yes, the money from the 2022 announcement and the 2023 -24 announcement, so the $25.06 
million has been allocated.  
Senator CASH:   Right. So this next round of funding is subject to, as you said, the relevant documentation et 
cetera that needs to be gone through — 
Mr Manning:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Okay, over the next four to eight weeks, depending on the period of time — 
Mr Manning:   It could be longer, but over the next short period of time.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 51 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That it takes. So who's currently in receipt of the funding?  
Ms Maddock:   Apparently there are three employer representatives funded under the grant. That is the 
Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Australian Industry Group, and the Council of Small 
Business Organisations Australia, and the employee representative funded is the Australian Council of Trade 
Unions.  
Senator CASH:   And you anticipate the BCA?  
Ms Maddock:   In the PET fund grant opportunity guidelines that outline the organisations that were eligible to 
apply for the grant opportunity in 2023, the Business Council of Australia was listed as one of those.  
Senator CASH:   But they declined the funding.  
Ms Maddock:   They chose not to apply.  
Senator CASH:   They chose not to apply for the funding.  
Mr Cains:   The BCA will be invited to apply, and it will be up to the BCA as to whether they do — 
Senator CASH:   As to whether or not they take it up?  
Mr Cains:   That's right.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Could I now go to another policy area, that of union demergers. You recall that 
in 2020 the former coalition government legislated the union demerger provisions, and the reason behind that, or 
the policy rationale, was to give greater flexibility to constituent parts, such as branches and divisions et cetera of 
amalgamated registered organisations by providing them with an opportunity to withdraw from an amalgamation 
if that would better serve them and their members. The current minister, who was actually the shadow minister at 
the time said of the repeal provisions, 'The bill before us represents a common sense technical amendment to the 
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009, especially the provisions in the act that deal with the withdrawal 
from amalgamation.' So back then the good news was it was common sense —in 2020. It would appear, though,  
that commonsense position taken in 2020 by  then shadow minister, Mr Burke, no longer reflects his position as 
minister. In opposition he also said : 'The problem with the provisions as they currently exist is that they only 
provide a window of between two and five years after an amalgamation in which a vote of that kind can take 
place. It is a narrow window that doesn't contemplate the possibility that the desire for a demerger and the reasons 
for a demerger may arise after that five -year window.' As I said, that was the commonsense position taken by  then 
opposition, which appears now to have changed with coming into government. Secretary, can the relevant 
officials take me through what the new arrangements are for demergers following the passage of the government's 
legislation?  
Ms Godden:   Certainly, Senator. We will just call the relevant officers to the table.  
Mr Tracey:   The changes to the demerger provisions introduced in the closing loopholes package did two 
things. The first was to rein state the two to five -year rule that you have just referred to  
Senator CASH:   So reinstate the two to five -year rule, yes.  
Mr Tracey:   And to amend the definition of 'separately identifiable constituent part' for the purposes of the 
demerger.  
Senator CASH:   And what did it change it from and to?  
Mr Tracey:   The present definition I can provide to you now, and I will just grab the previous one in a 
moment. The current definition of 'separately identifiable constituent part' in relation to an amalgamated 
organisation means : '(a) if an organisation deregistered under part 2  of the registered organisations act in 
connection with the formation of the amalgamated organisation remains separately identifiable under the rules of 
the amalgamated organisation as a branch, division or part of that organisation  then the definition "separately 
identifiable constituent part " means that branch, division or par t.' 
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Tracey:   And part  (b) of the definition is that a separately identifiable part means : 'If a state or territory 
branch of such a deregistered organisation under its rules as in force immediately before its deregistration remains 
separately identifiable under the rules of the amalgamated organisation as a branch, division or part of that 
organisation  then that branch, division or part.'  
Senator CASH:   And how did that compare to what it was previously?  
Mr Tracey:   I will just bring up the right words.  Senator, would you like me to read that out?  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind? Thank you. I just want to get the comparison.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 52 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Tracey:   Under the registered organisations act , as it was immediately in force just before the recent 
changes were made, so as of 26 February this year, which would have been the last date that this would have been 
in place, the definition of 'separately identifiable constituent part' in relation to an amalgamated organisation 
means —and there is (a), (b), and (c), if I can step you through that way:  
(a) if an organisation de -registered under Part 2 or a predecessor law in connection with the formation of the amalgamated 
organisation remains separately identifiable under the rules of the amalgamated organisation as a branch, division or part of  
that organisation —that branch, division or part; or  
(b) if a State or Territory branch of such a de -registered organisation under its rules as in force immediately before its de -
registration remains separately identifiable under the rules of the amalgamated organisation as a branch, division or part of  
that organisation —that branch, division or part; or  
(c) any branch, division or part of the amalgamated organisation not covered by paragraph (a) or (b) that is separately 
identifiable under the rules of the organisation.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. Just going back to the reinstatement of the two to five -year rule, prior to the 
reinstatement —so the law as it was changed under the former coalition government —if a union wanted to 
demerge, what was the process and what period did they have to do that?  
Mr Tracey:   I will bring that up for you now, Senator. Section 94 of the old act, if I can use that term to 
describe pre -closing loopholes reforms, provided that a constituent part of an amalgamated organisation could 
apply to the Fair Work Commission for a secret ballot to be held, so long as certain criteria were met so that they 
actually met the definition of constituent part. But the old act provided that an application could not be made if, 
during the last 12 months, the Fair Work Commission had rejected an application for a ballot or if a ballot was 
held and then ultimately rejected by the members who voted on that ballot. I will endeavour to find the answer to 
the second part of your question — 
Senator CASH:   Which is the two to five -year period. How long did they actually have once the two to five -
year period was abolished?  
Mr Tracey:   Section 94(a) was of the old act, and provided for accepting applications for ballots of more than 
five years after the amalgamation — 
Senator CASH:   And that was the whole point, the more than five years — 
Mr Tracey:   Indeed.  
Senator CASH:   And the limitation of two to five years has now been reinstated. Senator McAllister, another 
senator obviously now in government, at the time said, 'We also need to recognise the principle of freedom of 
association, which includes the right to join or leave a group, and that right doesn't only operate within a three -
year time period. As such, Labor supports the bill.' That was  then government's bill. In terms of the abandonment 
of the previous position by the government on demergers, what was the policy rationale for that?  
Mr Manning:   Senator, I'm not sure what the policy rationale for that is. I think you will have to put that to the 
government, unless the officers at the table who were present in the chamber at the time can shed any light on it.  
Senator CASH:   I'm trying to understand. The minister had a very clear position when in opposition in terms 
of the problems with the provisions: it was a narrow window, it doesn't contemplate the possibility that the desire 
for a demerger, and for the reasons that a demerger may arise after the five -year window. As Senator McAllister 
also said,  they back then recognised the principle of freedom of association et cetera includes the right to join or 
leave a group and —again , an acknowledgement in terms of the coalition's bill —that the right did not operate 
within a three -year time period. That was the rationale given for Labor to support the bill, which I thought was a 
very sensible rationale at the time. But then, as soon as the government changed, you have a change of policy 
rationale, and a change, obviously, in the legislation. And what was criticised previously has now been reinserted. 
So I am just trying to get my head around what was the policy rationale for that, and who came forward to 
provide the feedback  that was indeed required.  
Mr Cains:   The policy rationale, essentially, was to restore the longstanding understanding of when a 
demerger application could be made and also what constitutes a constituent part. The intention there is to provide 
greater certainty and stability for registered organisations and their members by encouraging unity and focusing 
organisations on working cooperatively to address issues of concern. I guess the position is that five years is a 
significant period of time in order to work out whether an amalgamation works for members of a union. 
Essentially, as I said, the reforms were to reinstate the previous longstanding provisions.  
Senator CASH:   There was a bill brought forward in the Senate, and it reflected the desire of the textile 
division of the CFMEU, who wanted to leave the CFMEU, and the stated reasons are the appalling behaviour of Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 53 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  others in the union, particularly from the construction division. They argue for the previous provisions to be 
reinstated. What is the process now for the textile union to leave the CFMEU?  
Ms Godden:   As we understand the matter, and without wanting to comment too much on specifics, I 
understand that the bill that was brought forward was to allow the manufacturing division to de -amalgamate, 
which is not the same constituent part which merged into the CFMEU, being representatives of the textile, 
clothing and footwear union, I think.  
Senator CASH:   So how does the manufacturing division, at this point in time, under the current rules, 
demerge from the CFMEU?  
Ms Godden:   As we understand the factual scenario, Senator, they would not be able to use the current 
provisions to demerge from the CFMEU.  
Senator CASH:   They can't use the current provisions? Is that what your evidence was? I can't quite hear it?  
Ms Godden:   I will pull this microphone forward, if that will assist.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you.  
Ms Godden:   Our understanding of the factual scenario around the manufacturing division is that they could 
not use the current provisions in the Registered Organisations Act to demerge from the CFMEU.  
Senator CASH:   And why is that?  
Ms Godden:   Because my understanding is that they are not a constituent part. I think that is the key factual 
element, because it was not the manufacturing division itself that merged into the CFMEU. My understanding of 
that division is that it comprises elements of the textile, clothing and footwear workers union but also other parts 
of the CFMEU that were in existence at the time of that merger.  
Senator CASH:   On that, what happens if they want to demerge? For example, Jenny Kruschel, the union 
secretary —and the evidence was given during the debate —said that female members of staff felt unsafe around 
the CFMEU and part of her evidence was, 'we had to move our division out of the building, and it is a very 
uncomfortable environment.' So if they want to demerge now for the safety of their members, are they able to do 
that?  
Mr Manning:   Senator, could I just clarify? Are we talking about the textile, clothing and footwear workers 
here or the manufacturing workers, because you are referring to evidence — 
Senator CASH:   It was the textile division that I was referring to.  
Mr Manning:   Okay, because I think that Ms Godden was talking about —and when you were referencing 
amendments in the Senate debate before they referenced a different part of the union. I am just very conscious, 
Senator, that we are talking about both factual scenarios with respect to a union but that also history and timing of 
the union structure is complicated, so the officers are doing their best to help you out.  
Senator CASH:   They are doing very well; you are doing very well. The issue I have is that you still have 
parts of a union that want to demerge but they do not appear now to be able to under the current legislation or 
because of the changes to the legislation. So is there now no avenue for them to demerge?  
Ms Godden:   At this point I couldn't comment on the TCF workers as a group. That is taking me beyond my 
factual knowledge of the scenario at this stage, I'm sorry, which was the second part of your question.  
Senator CASH:   But if they wanted to demerge now, how would they do that? That is a question that has been 
asked of me, and I do not know the answer under the new legislation. I knew how they could do it previously, but 
I don't know how they do it now —other than to say to them that there is no pathway.  
Ms Godden:   if we are talking about the manufacturing division, I think even under the previous legislation 
they still would not have been a constituent part, Senator, so there still would have been that barrier, if you like, 
that would have prevented the demerger. Under the current legislation, the manufacturing division is also not a 
constituent part, so that element has not changed. If we are talking about those TCF workers as a group — 
Senator CASH:   Yep.  
Ms Godden:   Sorry, I just don't know enough about them as a group to be able to give you a view of how the 
framework would apply to them under the old or the new situation.  
Senator CASH:   Do you have any information on that, Secretary, in terms of the TCF workers as a group?  
Ms James:   I'm sorry, Senator. The last time I was familiar with the textile, clothing and footwear workers 
organisation or situation I was talking with Michelle O'Neill with respect to right of entry provisions back during Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 54 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Work Choices, I think, or perhaps shortly after then. My current knowledge of the detail of union regulations 
around this area and the history of this union is not anywhere near the knowledge of others at the table.  
Senator CASH:   I remember when the bill was before the Senate, and certainly talking to some of the women 
who wanted to get out of the CFMEU. Jenny Kruschel is a TCF national secretary. She has made the comments 
that female members and staff felt unsafe around the CFMEU, and, as I said, she stated, 'we had to move our 
division out of the building' and 'it is a very uncomfortable environment.' I am trying to work out what pathway 
forward there is for them, which is something that they have obviously raised, in terms of getting the outcome that 
they desire so they can continue to properly represent their members, in a safe environment.  
Ms James:   Senator, I do not think we have sufficient facts at the table here today on this issue to be able to 
give you advice about how the current laws would operate with respect to this situation. We can certainly take a 
look at it.  
Senator CASH:   Would you? The query I have is: do they need a change in the legislation —again —to get out 
of the CFMEU? They seem to now be between a rock and a hard place, where they are stuck somewhere they 
don't want to be. They would like to get out, but there is no pathway forward for them legislatively now.  
CHAIR:   Sorry, just before anyone answers that question, Senator Cash, do you have much longer on this line 
of questioning?  
Senator CASH:   No, I do not, no.  
CHAIR:   I was just going to go to Senator Payman when you are — 
Senator CASH:   Okay.  
CHAIR:   Maybe just consider that, and tell me before you ask the final question; that would be helpful.  
Senator CASH:   I am happy to go to Senator Payman, and then I can quickly work through what questions are 
left from here.  
CHAIR:   Right. Thanks. Senator Payman.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Thank you, Chair. Good afternoon. My question is around casuals. Can the department 
please outline how many people are employed as casuals in Australia?  
Mr Cowgill:   We have 2.7 million casual employees, Senator, which represents 22.4 per cent of all employees.  
Senator PAYMAN:   And how recent is that data?  
Mr Cowgill:   That data is from February of this year.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Thank you. Minister, could you please outline the coalition's workplace relations policy 
on casual workers?  
Senator Watt:   Thanks, Senator. This obviously flows on from the discussion we were having before lunch.  
Senator CASH:   Why are we having this question, Chair, seeing as we haven't released anything? Why would 
you be outlining coalition policy that you clearly wouldn't know about or wouldn't have seen? That makes no 
sense.  
Senator Watt:   I am surprised that you didn't — 
Senator CASH:   This is just bizarre.  
CHAIR:   Is it that we are obsessed with the coalition? No, I think we are obsessed with getting answers. But 
Minister Watt is going to answer a question from Senator Payman, and if there are questions in other senators' 
times, if they would like to cross -examine any answers that Minister Watt gives, they are very much welcome to 
do that. Senator Payman has asked a question.  
Senator Watt:   Thanks for that, Chair. I am surprised that Senator Cash is saying that we couldn't possibly 
know the coalition's policy for casual workers, because it was front and centre in the opposition leader's budget -
in-reply speech only a couple of weeks ago . I'm not sure whether Senator Cash was there or not, and maybe 
wasn't paying attention, but it was right there. The quote from the budget -in-reply speech is, 'We will revert to the 
former coalition government's simple definition of a casual worker and create certainty for our 2.5 million small 
businesses.' So I am presuming, Senator Payman, that is the policy you are referring to. You did not even seem to 
know that you had a casual policy.  
Senator CASH:   Tell us about the drones.  
Senator Watt:   You shouldn't talk about your colleagues that way.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Thank you, Minister.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 55 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That is what I'm saying, you shouldn't talk about your colleagues as drones.  
CHAIR:   Can we just get to the question from Senator Payman, Minister.  
Senator Watt:   That is all we have to go on, Senator Payman, as to the coalition's policy on casual workers —
Mr Dutton saying they will revert to their former simple definition of a casual worker.  
Senator CASH:   Simple.  
Senator Watt:   It was simple. It was simple in the sense that it simply made it much more difficult for casual 
workers to gain permanency. That is how simple it was. Again, it is just more evidence that the coalition hasn't 
learnt from the past and wants to condemn more people to insecure work, more people in casual work and take 
away the rights of casuals.  
Senator PAYMAN:   So how many casuals would lose their rights under Mr Dutton's workplace relation 
policy, Minister?  
Senator Watt:   I think the department just said that there are 2.7 million casual workers in Australia, so it 
would be 2.7 million casuals who are at risk from this policy.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Can the department please provide a figure for the total number of women who make up 
the proportion of casuals in Australia?  
Mr Cowgill:   53.1 per cent of all casual employees are women. That is also as at February of this year.  
Senator PAYMAN:   So it is correct to assume that the majority of casual workforce is made up of women?  
Mr Cowgill:   That is correct.  
Senator PAYMAN:   And can you please advise the characteristics of casual workers most likely to want to 
convert?  
Ms Williams:   The characteristics of casuals that most likely want to convert are that they probably have been 
working for a longer period of time, and they are more likely to have full -time hours. Some of the anecdotal 
research from the statutory review of the previous coalition's casuals framework indicate that they are more likely 
to have caring responsibilities. So they are some of the characteristics, I think. What we have discussed before 
here is that it is really about an age and stage type of thing, so when people are younger and they are using casual 
employment when they are studying and working part -time, they may not have the same desire to convert. When 
they are looking to get a mortgage, supporting a family et cetera, because, as you know what comes with 
conversion from casual to permanent employment is, while you no longer have the 25 per cent casual loading, 
that you do gain access to job security and entitlements like paid annual and carers leave, which can be important 
if you have a family.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Absolutely. Thank you for outlining that. Back to you, Minister. Can you remind the 
committee: did the coalition vote for any of our measures to improve wages and job security for women?  
Senator Watt:   No. I am finding it difficult to think of a single time the coalition has voted for any measures to 
improve wages and job security for women or any worker.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Shameful. In your view, and given the coalition's commitment to taking a targeted 
package of repeals to the next election, what can casual workers expect if Peter Dutton and the coalition are 
elected?  
Senator Watt:   Clearly, under the policy announced by the opposition leader in the budget -in-reply speech, 
casual workers can expect fewer rights under a coalition government. The whole point of the Labor government 
fixing this policy was to ensure that casual workers were more protected. We always acknowledge that there is a 
place for casual work in the workforce and economy, but the protections that we put in place improve the lot of 
casual workers, and that would now be taken away. So, again, it is more evidence that Mr Dutton and the 
coalition want workers to work harder for less.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Thank you, and thank you, Chair.  
CHAIR:   I have a final question. I remember during the inquiry into insecure work, which was described by 
then government as a made -up issue, and in evidence at a Senate inquiry into job security, someone by the name 
of Sheree Clarke, an aged care nurse, told the job security inquiry on 14 July 2021, 'for me personally, insecure 
work has led to insecure housing, because I've only got a 16 -hour contract. I can't' sign a lease. My anxiety levels 
wouldn't allow me to a higher rent, so I've found myself living in a caravan park.' Minister, in your view, given 
the coalition's commitment to taking a targeted package of repeals to the next election, what can casual workers 
expect if Peter Dutton and the coalition are elected?  
Senator Watt:   I am sorry, I did not catch that woman's name, Chair.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 56 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   Ms Clarke.  
Senator Watt:   I am pretty astonished that Senator Cash continues to laugh at these case studies.  
Senator CASH:   You are commenting on coalition policy, seriously. This is estimates about your budget.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Everyone can see it.  
Senator Watt:   I hope everyone can see it. I hope everyone can see the coalition's policy to go back to the 
previous definition of casuals. I hope that everyone can see those policies. What were your words, Senator 
Cash —'aligned strongly with the coalition's approach to industrial relations'? I do very much home people can see 
that, because I think Australians have a right to know what would be on offer under a Dutton government. And 
what they know, due to the budget reply speech, is that women like Sheree Clarke who are casual employees 
would lose their rights under a coalition government.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   There were a lot more women sleeping rough under your government.  
Senator CASH:   A lot more.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   A lot more. Lots of caravans, lots of — 
Senator Watt:   How did you vote on the Housing Australia Future Fund again? How have you voted on 
everything we have ever done to deliver more housing? No, no, no. That is what you do.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Your policy is in place. How's it going for you?  
Senator Watt:   'We really want more housing. We are just going to vote against it.' 'We really want more 
money for workers. We are just going to vote against it.' Make up your minds.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We vote against bad policy that doesn't achieve anything, like your policies.  
CHAIR:   I will allow that question, Senator.  The Deputy Chair asked a question about the policies of the 
Labor government.  
Senator Watt:   And how good they are? Seriously, people have a right to know. Our government fixed the 
casual rort that was in place to ensure that, rather than people being deemed casual because of what it says in the 
contract, we now look at whether they have an advance commitment of work. You can't justify people working 
the same rosters, year after year and being treated as casuals. But that is what was happening under your 
government, and I would have thought you would want to fix that.  
Senator CASH:   They were given the right to convert under our government.  
Senator Watt:   We could have a good discussion about that.  
CHAIR:   I might go to finishing off our segment of time for questions. Terese Kingston, who works at the 
Mackay women's shelter, told the job security inquiry on 13 July 2021 that 'a woman in insecure or casual work 
was unable to access sick leave or annual leave or domestic violence leave, her ability to safely leave an abusive 
situation is reduced significantly.' Minister, what is the effect of the new legislation giving people rights, in light 
of that example from Ms Kingston, and, what are the consequences of the measures proposed by the coalition for 
job security for women?  
Senator Watt:   Again, the changes that we have made to the law —that were voted against by the opposition —
do take into account what is actually happening in someone's working environment, whether they are actually 
working the same hours over and over again rather than what their contract says. So the woman that you were just 
talking about would have a greater right to convert to permanent employment, if that is what she wanted, and gain 
the permanency, the job security, the sick leave benefits, the annual leave benefits that come with it.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Minister. Back to the coalition.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. This conversation is a little ironic, given the line of questioning that I was 
undertaking in terms of the government change in the laws so that the women in the textile division of the 
CFMEU are not able to actually leave it. So I ask you, Minister, what representations did the government have 
from the CFMEU 's construction division to stop that amendment put forward by Senator Lambie going through 
the Senate?  
Senator Watt:   Well, I couldn't possibly know that, Senator, so I would have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Please do. I'm sure you had representations well and truly. Did they threaten to stop 
donations to the Australian Labor Party, for example, if you allowed senator Lambie's amendment to ahead?  
Senator Watt:   Again, I would have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Are you aware that the CFMEU gave the Australian Labor Party $4.3 million in the lead -up 
to the last election?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 57 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   I wasn't aware of the dollar figure, but I'm certainly aware that, under Australian law, it is 
perfectly legitimate for unions, employers and others to make donations to political parties, so they may well have 
done so.  
Senator CASH:   $4.3 million. And isn't that the reason you took the side of John Setka in ensuring that these 
women who want to leave? Just Google Senator Lambie's amendment and you will find that she is actually 
standing alongside Jenny Kruschel, the union secretary, saying that female members of staff feel unsafe around 
the CFMEU. As I said, this is what she said, 'We had to move our division out of the building. It is a very 
uncomfortable environment.' Why is it that the Albanese government is hell -bent on not allowing these women, 
who just want representation given to them properly and to not have to be in an unsafe environment as their 
secretary has referred to, to get out of that union?  
Senator Watt:   If you want to Google something on this topic, I suggest that you Google the words 'Anthony 
Albanese' and 'John Setka' and you will see how the Prime Minister feels and the government feels about John 
Setka.  
Senator CASH:   Actions, quite frankly, speak louder than words. They are just words.  
Senator Watt:   The action was that he was kicked out of the Labor Party, wasn't it?  
Senator CASH:   Your actions in this regard have ensured that these women must remain, despite the fact that 
they do not want to, members of this union. So Mr Albanese can say what he likes in relation to Mr Setka.  
Senator Watt:   He expelled John Setka from the Labor Party. I agree, actions speak louder than words.  
Senator CASH:   The legislation has made sure that these women are not able to leave the CFMEU, and that is 
what they actually want to do.  
Senator Watt:   I agree that actions speak louder than words. I am just looking at the Australian Financial 
Review  of 20 October 2019: 'John Setka has resigned as a member of the ALP, ending a four -month campaign by 
Anthony Albanese to have him expelled.' So I agree that actions speak louder than words when it comes to how 
we feel about John Setka.  
Senator CASH:   He might have been expelled from the Labor Party, but why is it that this government 
continues to legislate in his favour, because he is the one who benefits out of this change that you made, despite 
the fact that —and this is the irony of all of it —if you had taken a consistent position when the coalition brought 
forward these changes in 2020, if you had opposed them at the time, the approach you have now taken in 
government may make sense. But when you had your then shadow minister standing in the parliament and saying, 
'The bill before us represents a commonsense technical amendment to the Fair Work Act, specifically the 
provisions in the act that deal withdrawal from amalgamation.' When you have the shadow minister at the time 
say, 'The problem with the provisions as they currently exist is that they only provide a window of between two 
and five years after an amalgamation in which a vote of that kind can take place. It is a narrow window that does 
not contemplate the possibility that the desire for a demerger, and the reasons for a demerger, may arise after that 
five-year window.' Then you have Senator McAllister herself at the time saying, 'We also need to recognise the 
principle of freedom of association, which includes a right to join or leave a group. And that right does not only 
operate within a three -year time period. As such, Labor supports the bill.' So what changed? Why aren't these 
women allowed to get out of the CFMEU? They do not want to be a part of this union.  
Senator Watt:   Our understanding is that there are ongoing discussions between the parties within the 
organisation, and so we don't think it is appropriate to pre -empt the outcome of those discussions. But, Senator 
Cash, if you want to talk about irony, I think everyone realises how ironic it is for you or any other member of the 
coalition to be standing up for women workers. Even in this — 
Senator CASH:   I will take offence to that.  
Senator Watt:   May I finish? Well, even in this term of office, our government has introduced paid family and 
domestic violence leave for all workers, including casuals, and made it a protected attribute. The coalition voted 
no. 
Unidentified speaker:   No, we didn't.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, you did. We prohibited sexual harassment through our changes to the secure jobs, better 
pay bill. You voted against it. We made gender equality and job security new objectives of the Fair Work Act. 
You were against it. We banned pay secrecy clauses, which predominantly affect women. You voted against it. 
We strengthened the right to flexible work. You voted against it. We strengthened the right to unpaid parental 
leave. You voted against it. We removed barriers to bargaining for low -paid and feminised industries. You voted 
against it. We supported wage increases for feminised industries like age care. You criticised us for doing so. So, Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 58 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  seriously? If you want to try to pretend you are standing up for women workers, your record shows completely 
the opposite.  
Senator CASH:   So what was your reason for stopping Senator Lambie's amendment from going through the 
Senate — 
Senator Watt:   I have already said — 
Senator CASH:   To get out of the CFMEU? They consider it an unsafe place.  
Senator Watt:   I've already said there are ongoing discussions between the parties.  
Senator CASH:   So that is as good as it gets for these women, is it? 'We had to move our division out of the 
building.' 'It is a very uncomfortable environment.' And as good as they get from the government is : 'Law's 
changed. There are ongoing negotiations.' That is it. That is the government's position.  
Senator Watt:   I have answered the question.  
Senator CASH:   Shame on the government, then, for having one position when we were in government and 
flipping as soon as they get into government so that they can deliver for the unions, because you well and truly 
have. These women want to get out of the CFMEU, and, because of changes in the law, they are unable to. The 
government is generally in favour of unions staying as large as possible because, let's face it, bigger unions give 
Labor bigger donations. And that is actually why you supported John Setka's side of the CFMEU, because, quite 
frankly, a smaller union can't give you anything. That is a real shame for these women, who are stuck.  
Senator Watt:   Thank you for sharing your opinion.  
Senator CASH:   It is a real shame. Could we now turn, Chair, to another topic?  
CHAIR:   You may.  
Senator CASH:   This one is the right to disconnect — 
Senator Watt:   I was looking ford to getting one on this.  
Senator CASH:   Could we talk about this in so far as it will affect small business. When do the changes for 
small business and the right to disconnect come into play?  
Mr Manning:   26 August 2025.  
Senator CASH:   What is that definition of 'small business' according to the Fair Work Act?  
Ms Godden:   Senator, I will just turn to section 23 for you: A small business employer 'employs fewer than 15 
employees at that time … for the purpose of calculating the number of employees employed by the employer at a 
particular time … a casual employee is not to be counted unless, at that time, the employee is a regular casual 
employee of the employer.'  
Senator CASH:   So it is fewer than 15 employees for the purposes of the Fair Work Act. Can you remind me 
what the ATO definition is? Is it 19 or fewer employees?  
Ms Godden:   Senator, that sound familiar to me, but I could not confirm that. I just don't have it in front of me.  
Senator CASH:   I will just get you to confirm that, or not, on notice, but in my mind it is fewer than 15 
employees for the Fair Work Act, and 19 or fewer for the ATO. Has the confusion between the differing 
definitions been raised with the department by any of those representing small business?  
Ms Yanchenko:   Not to my knowledge, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   So 15 and under for the purposes of the Fair Work Act. In terms of this particular tranche of 
the IR changes, what modelling was done specifically for the impact on small businesses as per the definition 
under the Fair Work Act of small business employer?  
Ms Williams:   You might recall that this was an amendment moved by the Greens as part of the closing the 
loopholes bill, so there is no impact analysis required as part of that process.  
Senator CASH:   Okay.  
Ms Williams:   Sorry, Senator, just to clarify, were you talking about just the right to disconnect?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, the right to disconnect. The amendment moved by the Greens was in relation to the right 
to disconnect, so no impact analysis has been done. And, more broadly then, the new tranches of IR changes 
specifically on small businesses as per the definition in the Fair Work Act of small business employer?  
Mr Manning:   In relation to the changes generally, some of them have an impact analysis equivalent process 
done in relation to them. For example, the changes in relation to casuals, so the impact on small business was 
looked at as part of that.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 59 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Okay, and where did we get to?  
Ms Williams:   The economy -wide cost across 10 years in terms of small business, in particular, was $370,000.  
Senator CASH:   That is what it found, did it?  
Ms Williams:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of the right to disconnect, has the department done any analysis at all on small 
business in particular and the impact since the legislation was passed four months ago?  
Ms Williams:   You might recall that, in terms of the impact on small business, when the legislation passed 
there was a requirement that the Fair Work Commission produce guidelines that would assist small business. The 
Fair Work Commission is currently undertaking that process, including consultation on those guidelines, and it 
intends that they be in place by 26 August this year. In addition, as part of the employer advisory services 
measure that went to the Fair Work Ombudsman, $500,000 was given to the Fair Work Ombudsman specifically 
to undertake education on the right to disconnect.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of how they are acquiring all the information that they are going to need, they are 
working with the department, I assume.  
Ms Williams:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   How is that process working?  
Ms Williams:   We have regular liaison with the Fair Work Ombudsman. As for where they are up to in that 
process, perhaps they will be able to give you a more detailed answer tomorrow.  
Ms Yanchenko:   Just to add to Ms Williams' s evidence, the Fair Work Commissioner has called for public 
commentary and submissions on its process as well. People are able to get in touch directly with the commission.  
Senator CASH:   Is that for small business or across the board?  
Ms Yanchenko:   Across the board but obviously including small business.  
Senator CASH:   Again, you are working with the Fair Work Commission and the Fair Work Ombudsman, 
given that you have the policy lead on the right to disconnect, particularly  to ensure that what they are doing is 
true and correct et cetera?  
Ms Yanchenko:   We meet regularly, as Ms Williams said, with the Fair Work Ombudsman, and we are doing 
the same with the Fair Work Commission.  
Mr Manning:   Can I clarify a matter about the definition of 'small business'?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Manning:   I understand that the ATO uses a turnover test. Maybe the ABS uses the definition of '20 and 
under' or '19 and under' which you were speaking about earlier.  
Senator CASH:   So the ABS is '19 or fewer'?  
Ms Godden:   The team has confirmed that the ATO uses a turnover definition, which is an aggregated 
turnover of less than $10 million. The FTE number was used for the implementation of Single Touch Payroll, but 
it is not the broader definition used by the ATO.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'the FTE number', that was the 19 — 
Ms Godden:   Nineteen, 20; yes.  
Senator CASH:   or fewer, and that was for the Single Touch Payroll.  
Ms Godden:   We understand that was used for the implementation of the Single Touch Payroll. Particular 
questions about the ATO's definition are for that portfolio.  
Senator CASH:   We'll go to them. I just wanted to get the comparison in my head. By way of responses that 
we received by way of questions on notice in relation to the drafting of the Greens 'right to disconnect' 
amendment, you gave us back a number of questions on notice: in particular No. 00045 and No. 00046. Can you 
take me through the timelines mentioned in those documents? The answer to the first one is: 'The department 
issued drafting instructions to the Office of Parliamentary Counsel on the right to disconnect measure on multiple 
occasions between 4 October 2023 and 8 February 2024'. Just take me through those timelines in terms of when 
you first said you became aware of the amendment and the department actually providing the drafting 
instructions . And are we able to get copies of those drafting instructions?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 60 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Godden:   The drafting instructions would be subject to legal professional privilege. It has been well 
established under several cases now that the development of legislation is a recognised ground of legal 
professional privilege.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'multiple occasions between 4 October 2023 and 8 February 2024', how many 
multiple occasions were there? This is in relation to one measure, and it was just an amendment. How many times 
were drafting instructions given?  
Ms Godden:   Instructions were issued to OPC on 24 days within that period.  
Senator CASH:   On 24 separate days?  
Ms Godden:   On 24 separate days in that period, including the first day and the last day.  
Senator CASH:   On 24 separate days you gave instructions in relation to the right to disconnect? Did that 
follow on from meetings with the Australian Greens? It seems excessive . For 24 separate days you were working 
very closely with the Office of Parliamentary Counsel on what, effectively, is a Greens policy.  
Mr Manning:   I think we answered, in one of the other questions on notice, when departmental officers 
attended a briefing; the 24 separate days just relate to updates on drafts et cetera. It's not a recollection of the 
department attending meetings with the Australian Greens.  
Senator CASH:   I didn't say that it was.  
Mr Manning:   And I don't think we would know necessarily whether they resulted from others attending 
meetings with the Australian Greens.  
Senator CASH:   So you were issuing instructions to OPC on 24 separate days in relation to the right to 
disconnect measure. Given that, how does it end up going through the parliament? In those 24 separate days, did 
anyone pick up the fact that it had criminal penalties associated with it?  
Ms Godden:   You're talking about a breach of a stop order?  
Senator CASH:   Correct.  
Ms Godden:   No. 
Senator CASH:   No -one picked that up, even though drafting instructions were given? Wow! —24 separate 
days.  
Senator Watt:   The parliament was made aware of this and we sought your assistance to fix that, but you 
refused to assist, and let the bill go through with those criminal penalties.  
Senator CASH:   If you look at question on notice No. 00055, the answer was , 'The minister's office requested 
the department's support for discussions with stakeholders on the right to disconnect measure,' and 'On 26 October 
2023, the department attended a discussion with the Australian Greens.' So, Mr Manning, the department did 
attend a discussion with the Australian Greens.  
Mr Manning:   That's the one I was referring to earlier.  
Ms Godden:   Yes, that was where the department supported the minister's office in that discussion.  
Senator CASH:   I'm sorry —supported the minister's office in?  
Ms Godden:   In that discussion with the Australian Greens on 26 October.  
Senator CASH:   Who represented the department at that meeting?  
Ms Godden:   That was Ms Williams and Mr Stephen Still, who was with the department at the time and was 
assistant secretary.  
Senator CASH:   He was the one who left in December?  
Mr Manning:   Correct.  
Ms Godden:   Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Who from the Australian Greens was at the meeting?  
Ms Williams:   It was Senator Barbara Pocock and members of her office , as well as members of the office of 
Adam Bandt, the leader.  
Senator CASH:   Was Mr Adam Bandt there, or did you say his office?  
Ms Williams:   Mr Bandt was not there. There was a representative from his office, and the meeting was 
convened by our deputy chief of staff in the minister's office.  
Senator CASH:   Was any representative from the government at that meeting?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 61 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Manning:   It was convened by the deputy chief of staff of the minister's office, an adviser from the 
minister's office.  
Ms Godden:   Senator, just to clarify something that was said earlier, Mr Still left the department towards the 
end of October and not in December . 
Senator CASH:   It was the end of October, yes. The deputy chief of staff of the minister's office convened the 
meeting. Was it in or about August 2023 that discussions were had with the minister's office about the right to 
disconnect?  
Ms James:   I think in our previous hearing we talked about ongoing advice to the minister and the office with 
respect to the right to disconnect arising out of our monitoring of the Senate Select Committee  on Work and 
Care 's inquiry, which I think was 2022, and the tabling of a private member's bill of Mr Adam Bandt, the member 
for Melbourne, with respect to the right to disconnect, in March 2023. So your questions on notice asked for a 
range of things, some quite specific and others a little broader. I did just want to point out that, as you would 
expect, the department was providing advice on those developments to the office — 
Senator CASH:   Of the minister?  
Ms James:   to the office of our minister throughout that time.  
Senator CASH:   When was the decision made that this would be an Australian Greens amendment and not a 
government amendment?  
Ms James:   That would not have been our decision; that was obviously a decision made by political parties. 
We were supporting discussions around the framing of a potential right, but that is not a decision that we would 
have made.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, when was the decision made that this would be an Australian Greens amendment 
and not a government amendment?  
Senator Watt:   I'll take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Can you also take on notice when that decision was conveyed to the department?  
Senator Watt:   Sure.  
Senator CASH:   Does the departmental secretary normally draft amendments for crossbenchers or non -
government parties, or issue drafting instructions for them?  
Ms James:   In my time of being involved with the drafting of legislative amendments, it is something that 
from time to time the department is asked to assist in. Mr Godden can speak to the more recent practices.  
Ms Godden:   The practice varies. As you know, members of parliament who are not members of the 
government do have access to an outposted parliamentary counsel drafter. From time to time, the department will 
be asked to assist the government in an amendment, generally that they wish to support by either providing 
comments on the drafting or by drafting an amendment in a particular form. It's not at all unusual for there to be a 
certain lack of clarity about whether an amendment would be a government amendment or a non -government 
amendment, or for those decisions to change over the course of a legislative project.  
Senator CASH:   In this term of government, have there been other meetings with the Australian Greens and 
the department where amendments are then commissioned on behalf of the Australian Greens?  
Mr Manning:   Could you ask that question again?  
Senator CASH:   In this term of parliament, have there been other meetings with the Australian Greens and 
representatives from the department where amendments are then commissioned post those meetings?  
Ms Godden:   I am not sure that we would phrase it as 'amendments being commissioned'.  
Senator CASH:   You tell me; what is the language that you would use?  
Mr Manning:   I think we'll have to take the broader question on notice, in the sense that we're only part of a 
department and I can't recall a situation like the one you have described. I think Mr Godden is speaking about the 
notion of what happened in this specific case and whether that could be properly classified as 'commissioning'.  
Senator CASH:   Could you say that again? I didn't quite hear you.  
Mr Manning:   We'll take on notice the broader question.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, the broad question, and that was: how many other meetings with the Australian Greens 
and the department have there been and, from those meetings — 
Mr Manning:   That's right. I was just clarifying what Ms Godden was saying, which was that she wouldn't 
classify what happened here as 'commissioning an amendment'.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 62 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   No, and that's what I think M s Godden was about to explain.  
Ms Godden:   I was going to say that I certainly can't recall that with any precision. But from time to time the 
department is asked to support discussions with members of parliament, whether from the opposition or the 
crossbench, on proposed legislative amendments. That's certainly happened in our ordinary course of supporting 
the government in this way from time to time. That could be discussing what's in a bill that's proposed, and it 
wouldn't be unusual for members of parliament to raise the question of amendments in those sorts of discussions.  
Senator CASH:   In this particular instance, though, there was a meeting with the Australian Greens, and we 
know that because you've provided us with that information via questions on notice and the answers in response 
to them. The meeting was convened by the deputy chief of staff of the minister's office. As a result of that 
meeting, an amendment was drafted; however, on 24 separate occasions, instructions were given to OPC in 
relation to the right to disconnect.  Perhaps you could also confirm that you're taking this on notice: you've got the 
broader policy issue, which you said that you would take on notice in terms of meetings. But in terms of this piece 
of legislation specifically, what went through meetings with the Australian Greens and the department, facilitated 
by the minister's office, and whether there was any suggested drafting to OPC coming out of those meetings.  
Mr Manning:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Perhaps I can return to the right to disconnect. Obviously, a lot of questions are now being 
raised by small business in terms of the impact on them, and I understand that there is the date of 26 August 2025, 
so there's still a period of time until that commences formally. However, in terms of discussions in particular, how 
are you communicating with small businesses across the country, because there still seems to be a lot of confusion 
as to when the start date is for them. A lot of them actually think that it has started now; they don't know that it 
hasn't. How are you communicating with them in terms of the fact that there's still a while to go and there's an 
opportunity to talk through the process et cetera?  
Mr Manning:   Certainly, we've published fact sheets about it, which I know that some of the small business 
peaks have used —they've used them generally; I couldn't say that they've specifically used them in relation to 
this—otherwise, it would be via the Fair Work Ombudsman's established methods of communication, both with 
the employer advisory service about specifics and in the general sorts of ways of publishing that information. If 
there  were  still confusion, for example, amongst industry peaks, we'd certainly be more than happy to attend. I 
have, for example, attended a discussion with the small business ombudsman's policy committee, where we spoke 
about it generally, and we always remain happy to do that, should small business peaks wish us to.  
Senator CASH:   In practical terms, how do you expect the right to disconnect to operate in a small business?  
Senator Watt:   Just before officials answer that, it's really important to remember what this right is. There has 
been a lot of commentary about this right which would suggest that it's much more invasive and whatever other 
adjective you want to use than it actually is. The right does not prohibit employers from contacting their 
employees and it doesn't prevent employees from contacting each other, including across time zones. Some 
people have wanted to portray this as some ban on an employer calling or emailing an employee after hours. I 
remember spending a lot of time at the last estimates explaining that, and it hasn't stopped certain people going 
out and misrepresenting what it actually is.  It's about giving an employee the right to refuse to monitor, read or 
respond to contact or attempted contact outside working hours when they are not expected to be working or paid 
to be working, as long as doing so is not unreasonable. If you like, it's a right for a worker to protect themselves 
against disciplinary action being taken if they refuse to respond to or read an email or take a call outside working 
hours when they're not being paid; that's what it's about. It's not about stopping employers contacting people.  
Senator CASH:   Can I ask again: how do you see it working practically with small businesses?  
Mr Manning:   This is reflected in the dispute resolution provisions. In addition to what the minister has just 
said, it's geared up for that situation where an employer, having sought to contact an employee and the employee 
exercising the right to disconnect, would then seek to take action against them. What we've envisaged would 
occur is that, in those situations, the employer would have a discussion with their employee, particularly in small 
business, where they're more likely to know them personally, about the reasons for the non -monitoring of work -
related emails. Hopefully, that would be the end of it, in the sense that the employer wouldn't go on to take 
adverse action against the employee at that time. The dispute resolution regime sets it up, in that it expects there 
to be conversations in the first instance.  
Senator CASH:   You said 'dispute'; I didn't quite hear what you said after that.  
Mr Manning:   Dispute resolution regime. The right is premised on there being a conversation at a workplace, 
in the first instance, in the event of there being a disagreement around it. In looking at some of the factors that 
help inform an understanding of the high -level right about whether the refusal to monitor a work -related Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 63 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  communication is unreasonable, they go to things like the employee's role, their level of responsibility, whether 
they're compensated to remain available, the method of contact, the reason for the contact and their personal 
circumstances. Again, they're things that are more likely to be directly in the mind, we would think, of a small 
business owner than perhaps other larger businesses that don't know their staff as well as can occur in small 
businesses.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of that, if someone is paid an allowance to be contacted outside hours, will there be 
any limits in relation to when that person is able to be contacted; how do you work through that?  
Mr Manning:   You'd work through it, I suppose, in the sense that, if the allowance has scope around it —for 
example, it talks about hours et cetera —that would be one factor that goes to the assessment of reasonableness. 
Overall, there's an assessment of reasonableness and one of the factors that's taken into account, should it occur, is 
the extent to which the employee is compensated to remain available to perform work during the period in which 
the attempted contact is made or for working additional hours generally outside their normal hours. It's one of the 
factors that can be taken into account in that assessment of reasonableness; that, again, becomes relevant, should 
the employer wish to take action in relation to the employee not being available to be contacted.  
Senator CASH:   Shouldn't  you be providing this guidance already, because there is so much confusion at the 
moment among small businesses?  
Ms Godden:   In the legislation, there is an obligation for the Fair Work Commission to issue guidelines. I don't 
know whether my colleagues want to add a bit more.  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind —to issue the guidelines, yes?  
Ms Williams:   As part of that process, in relation to the guidelines and the terms in modern awards, the 
commission has called for submissions on that matter. I think 20 written submissions have been received from 
stakeholders, and the next stage is submissions in reply, and they're due on 11 June. In the main, the submissions 
have gone to modern award terms, but I think all parties have recognised the importance of guidelines as part of 
that process. I might return to your question on an on -call allowance and how small business would know.  
Senator CASH:   How they would actually work that out.  
Ms Williams:   Yes, absolutely. That also goes to this process that I was just outlining at the Fair Work 
Commission, in that the commission is currently going through modern awards to see the interactions with 
existing terms. Some of the terms that they've called out for special attention are, indeed, terms for employees to 
be on call, recall to duty or remain on stand -by in readiness to return to duty.  These on -call and recall provisions 
already do generally have monetary compensation —an allowance. They also have terms so that, where an 
employee who is recalled to duty actually needs to do more than just respond to the contact —actually do some 
work —overtime will be payable. In that situation there is already, in the award system, guidance about that.  
Coming back to what the minister said earlier, this is about disconnection when you are not at work and not 
being compensated for that work. In the situation of an on -call allowance, you are receiving compensation and 
there are terms in the modern award that give direction about the allowance to be paid, the steps in terms of that 
contact and any further compensation.  
Senator CASH:   One of the questions that keeps getting posed to me is: give me an example of a worker to 
whom the right to disconnect does not apply.  
Ms Williams:   In answering that question, it might be worth going back to the policy problem that the right is 
trying to resolve. There was evidence to the work and care Senate inquiry on that. That's about the problems of 
availability creep, especially to do with technology. That's about people having devices, for example, on which 
they're receiving emails but who are not necessarily at work or being paid to work. It's about a reassurance that 
they can say, 'I don't need to check my phone; I don't need to respond to that email,' unless, of course, it's 
unreasonable not to do so. Particularly with the COVID -19 pandemic and the flexibilities that we all had to adjust 
to as part of that, that boundary between work and outside work, where you're not being paid, has become blurred. 
This is really about reinforcing and providing workers with the protection that, when they're not at work and not 
being paid, they don't need to be doing their work.  
Senator CASH:   I accept that, but the issue for small business is that it becomes so confusing for them. 
Coming out of these estimates, if I had to give small business a concise time line of when they will get guidance 
in relation to the very simple questions of who, what, when, where, why and how, what could I say to them 
following these estimates?  
Mr Manning:   The FWO will be able to tell you tomorrow what the time lines are for their guidance, noting 
that their guidance will be in place before it commences for medium and larger businesses, so a year before it Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 64 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  exists for small business. Ms Williams has outlined the awards process. Again, before the commencement of the 
provision for medium and larger businesses this year, there will be an award provision in it; likewise, the 
commission could speak to the time line on their guidance material. That should mean that, by the end of 
estimates — 
Senator CASH:   But it starts in three months time for businesses other than small businesses.  
Mr Manning:   That are not small businesses. That's 26 August 2024.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. I have businesses saying to me, 'Where are the guidelines?' to which I respond, 'I don't 
know.'  
Senator Watt:   Small businesses or large businesses? You were just saying that it was small businesses.  
Senator CASH:   Both.  
Mr Manning:   As I say, the FWO and the Fair Work Commission are on tomorrow and will be able to speak 
to more detail about their timeline.  
Senator CASH:   I understand that, but you're still the department that has the policy lever that is involved in 
implementing the legislation, so saying that it's up to the Fair Work Ombudsman et cetera is not really an answer.  
Mr Manning:   Senator, you asked when the guidance would be in place.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Manning:   We've spoken generally , but we've suggested speaking to the people producing the guidance 
for a more specific answer.  
Senator CASH:   I know that, but you are still the department that oversees all of that, so I would have thought 
you would be able to provide a concise answer as to when the expectation is that businesses will be provided with 
guidance. Have you had any discussions with the Fair Work Commission or the Fair Work Ombudsman about the 
guidance?  
Mr Manning:   Businesses, of course, can contact the Fair Work Ombudsman now, in relation to the right to 
disconnect and what it may mean in relation to their business. It's not as though they're not able to take queries 
about it — 
Senator CASH:   But they also have other things to do on a daily basis, like employ people and run their 
business. It's not as easy as saying, 'They can just pick up the phone.' I would have thought that the department 
that oversees the legislation and has the policy levers would be able to clearly articulate the process by which the 
guidance principles that the department have talked about would actually be available. Again, I ask you: what 
discussions have you been having as a department with both the Fair Work Commission and in particular the Fair 
Work Ombudsman about the guidance?  
Ms Williams:   As part of our regular practice, my team meets with the Fair Work Ombudsman and the Fair 
Work Commission at the relevant levels. That's ongoing. In those meetings, they talk about a whole range of 
reforms, including the right to disconnect. That's just part of our normal business practice.  
Senator CASH:   Let's now narrow it down to discussions in relation to the right to disconnect and the 
guidelines. The change in the law will formally occur around June, July, August, in 12 weeks time. What are the 
indications that the Fair Work Ombudsman has given to you, and are you satisfied that businesses are going to 
have enough time to go over the guidelines, understand them and put in place any processes that they may need to 
put in place?  
Ms Williams:   I'd have to take on notice the specifics of those conversations. As I said, they're ongoing. The 
commission obviously have a statutory responsibility to produce those guidelines, so they are working on them. 
As I understand it, they will be ready for 26 August. As I said, they've asked stakeholders for their views. The 
stakeholders have given their initial views; they're due on 11 June. It's also the statutory responsibility of the Fair 
Work Ombudsman to provide education and advice. I am confident that they will be able to do that, as they do 
about a whole range of workplace relations matters. They will be able to give you more specific detail about the 
implementation timeframe tomorrow.  
Senator CASH:   If a member of the public or a business calls the department about how the right to 
disconnect is going to work, what is the answer that is given to them?  
Ms James:   I think, in that circumstance, it would be appropriate for us to refer them to the Fair Work 
Ombudsman. They can call or send an email to the Fair Work Ombudsman. The reason for that is that we are 
responsible for the legislation before it's the law —and, of course, we're responsible for the legal framework —but 
the regulator is responsible for enforcing the law. Also, the Fair Work Ombudsman is responsible for educating Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 65 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  and advising parties on the interpretation of the law. For us to provide advice when it's clearly the legislative 
function of the Fair Work Ombudsman would be inappropriate. I appreciate that might sound like the government 
passing people around — 
Senator CASH:   Yes, that is what it sounds like.  
Ms James:   but the Fair Work Ombudsman is well known as the adviser to business, including small business, 
with additional funding in the last budget to continue its small business advisory service. That service is well 
utilised, and it will be continuing that service. The Fair Work Ombudsman is well known as the appropriate 
source of advice and information. It provides advice that people can rely on and follow, knowing that it has been 
developed through its processes and is consistent with how the law might be enforced, should it come to that. 
Similarly, when the commission is developing its details as well, it's important that we don't pre -empt that. That 
would be the appropriate response. There are many channels into the Fair Work Ombudsman , and it deals with 
thousands of queries from people every year about the operation of work laws.  
CHAIR:   I have a question regarding the same matter. Is the department aware of any enterprise bargaining 
agreements that already have 'right to disconnect' clauses? Maybe you could step me through some, and possibly 
all, of those clauses.  
Ms Yanchenko:   I don't think we could speak to the detail , certainly not here. As at mid -April, we were aware 
of 77 enterprise agreements that did have 'right to disconnect' clauses in them.  
CHAIR:   Do you have a feel for what section of industries and organisations that might cut across?  
Ms Yanchenko:   I'll just see whether Ms Williams has that information; I don't.  
Ms Williams:   Unfortunately, I don't have that broken down by industry, but we can certainly take that on 
notice. Not all of them specifically say 'right to disconnect clause'. They are about switching off or work -life 
balance. In getting that data, one of the things that we're doing is working with our coding team to go through to 
see whether we can find the ones that go to the intent of the right to disconnect.  
Mr Manning:   There are some in the emergency services space. I think we might have put that in our 
submission in relation to the bill, but we'll take that on notice and provide that greater detail.  
CHAIR:   I'm aware that it's in the police force, for example.  
Mr Manning:   Yes; that's what I was thinking of.  
Ms Williams:   The Victoria police force.  
CHAIR:   I understand that the Queensland police force has an arrangement, the Federal Police are negotiating 
an arrangement and other state jurisdictions have the 'right to disconnect' clauses.  
Mr Manning:   Yes.  
CHAIR:   If there's the capacity to give us —not now, because I appreciate that you've asked to take it on 
notice —a list of the ones that have been identified so far, whilst I appreciate that there's ongoing work taking 
place, that would be of assistance.  
Mr Manning:   Could you clarify that, please.  
CHAIR:   Perhaps we could get a list of the 'right to disconnect' clauses which have been identified so far, 
remembering that there's ongoing work identifying other 'right to disconnect' clauses.  
Mr Manning:   Yes. We're certainly aware of those police ones, and I think there's one for electricity network 
employees; I think Western Power has one. But we'll take that on notice and perhaps give a full list and a sample 
of some of the clauses; would that help?  
CHAIR:   Have you got a feel for how far back some of those clauses go —some of the earlier iterations? I'm 
not asking for a specific date.  
Mr Manning:   No. I'll have to take that on notice.  
Ms Williams:   We mentioned in our submission to the bill that passed the parliament recently, in relation to 
criminal penalties, that the Victoria Police enterprise agreement from 2019 has one. We also mentioned one from 
the University of Technology Sydney from 2021. There are a range of clauses that go back a while, but we'll be 
able to get that data to you on notice.  
CHAIR:   At this stage, we've found some that go back at least five years. As for the question about being 
called out to carry out work, I guess it would relate to considering whether that's part of a 'right to disconnect' in 
some old clauses in agreements. Do you put that into the category of the right to disconnect? If there's a penalty Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 66 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  for a call -out, would it say, 'Were you to be called out, you would not be paid,' or would you be called out and 
paid?  
Ms Williams:   Just to clarify, I was talking about that in relation to the work that the Fair Work Commission is 
currently undertaking to include a 'right to disconnect' term in all 121 modern awards. As part of that, they're 
looking at existing award clauses that might interact with that clause. Potentially, it could be in some of those 
enterprise agreements —maybe not 77 of them. We could also have a look at that issue.  
Ms Yanchenko:   I think we would characterise a call -out or a restriction allowance provision as quite separate 
from the right to disconnect; although, as Ms Williams indicated, there is that interaction piece that the 
commission is looking at at the moment.  
CHAIR:   I am mindful and aware that interrelationship with call -out and payments being made does go back 
many decades.  
Mr Manning:   Many provisions are relevant to the broader issue, such as maximum hours et cetera and the 
types of provisions that you are talking about. In a way, the right to disconnect is a recognition of how the issue 
plays out in modern times, where the ability to disconnect from work is not so clear -cut. That's why the high -level 
principle has been put in the act, building on those 77 EAs that we're talking about.  
Senator Watt:   While there's a break in the questioning, could I correct one thing that I said before. It turns out 
that the opposition did not vote against the government's introduction of paid family and domestic violence leave 
for all workers. However, it did vote against the prohibition of sexual harassment; making gender equity and job 
security new objectives of the Fair Work Act; banning pay secrecy causes; strengthening the right to flexible 
work; strengthening the right to unpaid parental leave; removing barriers to bargaining for low -paid and 
feminised industries; and supporting wage increases for feminised industries. I'll give you that one; you didn't 
vote against that. But every other measure that we've taken to support women workers you have voted against.  
CHAIR:   Thank you for that clarification, Minister. There are so many noes.  
Senator Watt:   When the answer is usually no, you think it's going to be a no.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I want to go to the changes to the definition of 'casual' and 'casual workers'. Can you 
please confirm for me the new definition of a casual employee under the Fair Work Act?  
Mr Tracey:   I can take you to that one. The new definition of 'casual employee' in section 15A of the Fair 
Work Act, which will commence from 26 August this year, is as follows:  
(1) An employee is a casual employee  of an employer only if:  
(a) the employment relationship is characterised by an absence of a firm advance commitment to continuing and 
indefinite work; and  
(b) the employee would be entitled to a casual loading or a specific rate of pay for casual employees under the terms of 
a fair work instrument if the employee were a casual employee, or the employee is entitled to such a loading or rate of pay 
under the contract of employment.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you outline all the factors that must be considered to determine whether there is 
a firm advance commitment to continuing indefinite work?  
Mr Tracey:   The case that I've just described is the two -step test for casual employment under the changes 
introduced in the closing loopholes act No. 2 from earlier this year. The act does provide guidance to parties about 
how they might go about identifying whether someone is a casual employee for the purposes of that two -step test. 
Those indicia start at subsection (2). I can highlight that in summary, or would you prefer to be walked through 
them term by term?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, please.  
Mr Tracey:   Subsection (2) of 15A is:  
For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a) — 
that's the provision that speaks to the absence of that firm advance commitment — 
whether the employment relationship is characterised by an absence of a firm advance commitment to continuing and 
indefinite work is to be assessed:  
(a) on the basis of the real substance, practical reality and true nature of the employment relationship; and  
(b) on the basis that a firm advance commitment can be in the form of the contract of employment or, irrespective of the 
terms of that contract, in the form of a mutual understanding or expectation between the employer and employee not rising 
to the level of a term of that contract (or to a variation of any such term) … 
Subsection 2(c) also provides:  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 67 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  having regard to, but not limited to, the following considerations … 
Subparagraph (i) is:  
whether there is an inability of the employer to elect to offer work or an inability of the employee to elect to accept or re ject 
work (and whether this occurs in practice);  
Subparagraph (ii) is:  
whether, having regard to the nature of the employer's enterprise, it is reasonably likely that there will be future availabi lity of 
continuing work in that enterprise of the kind usually performed by the employee;  
Subparagraph (iii) is:  
whether there are full -time employees or part -time employees performing the same kind of work in the employer's enterprise 
that is usually performed by the employee;  
Subparagraph (iv) of subsection (2) is:  
whether there is a regular pattern of work for the employee.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In relation to the real substance, practical reality and true nature of the employment 
relationship, which are also what's listed on the Fair Work Ombudsman's website as things that must be 
considered, can you elaborate on how these abstract concepts will be concretely evaluated?  
Ms Godden:   I think the minister has neatly summarised this in the past as the 'what's really going on' test. I 
think that's a really useful way of thinking about that requirement.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I just missed the last couple of words.  
Ms Godden:   The minister described it as the 'what's really going on' test, and I said that I think that's a really 
useful way of thinking about this requirement: what's really going on.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   How would it be concretely evaluated, then? Employers are trying to figure this 
out—what it means to them. 'What's really going on' is a nice colloquial sort of term, but what does it really mean, 
if I can put it that way?  
Ms Godden:   I think what it really means is: do you know when you're going to work?  
Mr Manning:   It will be an examination of what's occurring in practice and in reality in the employment 
relationship. Rather than just looking at what the contract might have said, it involves an examination of what is 
actually occurring in the employment relationship at the time.  
Ms Godden:   Sadly, for lawyers, there are any number of times when people sign contracts and they put them 
in the bottom draw er and never look at them again, and what is actually happening can wander from what is in the 
terms of the contract.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But it's important that employers get it right at the beginning , and that's why we're 
seeking this clarity. As for what needs to be considered when demonstrating a firm advance commitment, the 
website states that there are 'several other factors'. What might be those other factors that need to be considered?  
Ms Williams:   Can you just clarify whether that is the website currently?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. 
Ms Williams:   So this relates to the test that is coming in on 26 August?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I believe so. It's on the Fair Work Ombudsman's website. They've listed 'several 
other factors'.  
Ms James:   We might not have the document to hand that you're reading from , and, for the purpose of 
answering your questions, it might help us if we did have it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I can get you that.  
Ms James:   It's just that, if you're referring to a particular turn of phrase that the Fair Work Ombudsman has 
used on its website, it would just help us to be looking at what you're looking at.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We'll get you a copy of it.  
Ms James:   Thank you.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'm looking at the very last bullet point in the second column, right at the top of the 
first page.  
Ms Yanchenko:   Are you referring to the bullet point that reads 'several other factors'?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 68 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Yanchenko:   So the several other factors are the ones listed immediately below. They're the ones that Mr 
Tracey read out for you earlier with respect to the employee having a regular pattern of work and whether or not 
there are full -time or part -time employees performing the same duties in the same sort of pattern et cetera.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You can see what it says just underneath those bullet points: 'The above isn't a full 
list and other factors may apply.' What are those other factors?  
Ms Yanchenko:   That's a reference to the fact that the provisions that Mr Tracey read to you earlier set out a 
non-exhaustive list, and other things might be relevant to the particular employment relationship based on the 
circumstances in a particular business. So it just reflects that non -exhaustive list or the fact that it is a non -
exhaustive list.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   This is where it gets concerning and confusing for employers because it is that non -
exhaustive list that they want to comply with and make sure that they're complying with. Can you provide us with 
a specific example of where an employee would clearly be classified as casual under the new rules?  
Ms Godden:   I think the website that you've provided us with provides an example quite neatly underneath 
that. I'm only just getting the opportunity to read it now. I have to confess that I haven't been reading the FWO's 
website, and I will apologise to them for that later. But that seems to be a reasonable example.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. So Josh starts as a bartender for a new summer pop -up restaurant, and it goes 
on. Is that the example?  
Ms Godden:   Yes. 
Senator Watt:   So Josh is starting a pop -up restaurant? He's a busy boy.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   For a new pop -up restaurant.  
Senator Watt:   He's running a bank, he's running for preselection , and he's running a pop -up bar. He's a busy 
fella!  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Oh, so funny.  
Senator Watt:   He's too busy with his pop -up bar to run for preselection.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I will continue with my questions. In Josh's case, what specific actions must an 
employer take to maintain his employee's casual status since the change of definition?  
Ms Godden:   I wouldn't characterise it as specific actions that an employer needs to take to maintain casual 
status. The way that I would characterise this is that as people are engaged on particular terms and they need to be 
correctly classified on engagement. After that, there is a casual conversion process that may apply but, otherwise, 
assuming that somebody is correctly classified on engagement, there are very limited circumstances after that 
when an employer then needs to trouble themselves about whether or not that person is legitimately a casual 
employee. I'm sorry; I'm just trying to turn to those core times; I think Mr Tracey has beaten me to it, however.  
Mr Tracey:   Just for reference, new subsection 5 of 15A is what I would describe as the 'specified event 
provision', which effectively provides that, once an employee is engaged as a casual, they remain a casual 'until 
the occurrence of a specified event'. This provision will operate so that the status of employment cannot change 
automatically without some sort of conscious awareness or some sort of trigger event. In short, those four events 
are, firstly, where the employee puts forward a notification to their employer that they wish to convert and that 
notification is accepted by the employer; secondly,  where status is changed as a result of an arbitrated outcome 
from the Fair Work Commission, if disputes arise in relation to these provisions; thirdly,  where conversion is 
provided for in a fair work instrument, such as where an enterprise agreement might set out a casual conversion 
pathway; and , fourthly,  where the employee accepts an offer to convert that might be provided outside the fair 
work instrument framework, so an employer might just have a direct engagement, offer a conversion on the spot, 
and that's what the provisions are intended to acknowledge.  
Ms Godden:   So the answer to your question is that, once the employer has correctly engaged someone as a 
casual, they need do nothing to maintain the status of that employment, until one of those four events occurs.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If an employee can accept or reject work, does it automatically make them casual?  
Ms Godden:   When you look at those factors, I think it is fair to say that you're having regard to those factors 
but no one factor is overwhelming or determinative.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Even as substantial a factor as that one would be?  
Ms Godden:   It's very hard to talk in the abstract, but you are right: a complete discretion to accept or reject 
shifts would tend to indicate that the employee is a casual employee.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 69 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What are the exact legal penalties for employers who misclassify employees as 
casual?  
Mr Tracey:   I'm sorry; is your question related to when employees are first engaged as employees?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, but then ongoing, I guess. There could be multiple intersections with — 
Mr Tracey:   I might take the first part first, which is in relation to the engagement of the employee. The casual 
provisions introduced by the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No. 2) Act do not impose a 
penalty per se for misclassification on commencement. You may recall from the debate process that a provision to 
that effect was originally included in the draft but removed by way of amendment before the act passed, so there 
no longer exists such a penalty. What I would say though is that employers, at the moment and as has been the 
case since the enactment of the Fair Work Act, are required to comply with the National Employment Standards, 
with modern awards and with enterprise agreements, and penalties do attach to those things, but that's an existing 
feature of the framework. Also, of course, the provision of things like annual leave and other types of paid leave 
arrangements form part of the National Employment Standards. But the short answer is that nothing in these new 
provisions imposes a penalty on misclassification at the outset.  
Ms Godden:   And then I think what is really important is that discussion that we had before, which is that an 
employee's status cannot automatically change under this test. So the old situation where, if the work environment 
or your arrangements changed, or somebody's status could change, simply does not occur under these provisions. 
Subsection 5 gives employers a huge degree of certainty about whether or not their employees remain casual 
employees because there are only those four times when somebody's status can change, which is really relevant to 
this discussion.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So a party needs to trigger the conversion; is that right?  
Ms Godden:   Correct.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is there an obligation on the employer to make their employee aware of their rights?  
Ms Godden:   There are certainly some obligations that remain. Please, Ms James.  
Ms James:   The Fair Work Ombudsman's FAQ sheet does tell us the obligations.  
Ms Godden:   We're all trying to answer your question, Senator.  
Ms James:   It's a good read.  
Ms Williams:   Currently, employers are required to provide a casual employment information statement at 
commencement of employment , and then, for small businesses, they'll be required to provide that statement again 
at 12 months of employment , and then that's it. So it's at commencement and at 12 months. Medium to large 
businesses are required to provide it at commencement, at six months, at 12 months and then every 12 months 
thereafter, because, as you'll recall, one of the characteristics that make people more likely to convert is 
potentially their length of time with the employer , and, therefore, there's a requirement to keep, I guess, reminding 
the employee that they do have these rights to convert throughout the employment relationship but only for 
medium and large businesses.  
Ms Godden:   I think, perhaps also relevantly, employers are no longer required to offer casual conversion 
under the new framework either. So employees may notify employers that they think they no longer meet the 
definition , and that can trigger a conversion event, but employers are no longer required to proactively offer 
conversion under the new framework.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But in terms of providing that information, is there a penalty if they don't?  
Ms Williams:   I think the requirement to provide the casual employment information statement currently exists 
as part of the National Employment Standards and, therefore, attracts civil penalties. That requirement is currently 
in the act.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What is that penalty?  
Ms Williams:   I need to defer to my legal colleagues for the exact penalty.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If it's going to take time to get it, maybe you can come back to me.  
Ms Godden:   If we could come back to you after the afternoon tea break, that might be the most efficient way 
to do this.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. If we can, in the next couple of minutes, perhaps you could take this question: 
how does the Fair Work Commission specifically resolve disputes about casual employment status?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 70 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Godden:   After workplace -level attempts to resolve a dispute, parties may seek Fair Work Commission 
assistance to resolve it. Section 66MA provides that the Fair Work Commission can conduct a consent arbitration. 
The Fair Work Commission could order that an employee continues to be casual or that they're a full -time or part -
time employee from a certain date. Alternatively, parties may seek to apply to the Federal Circuit and Family 
Court with a small claim to resolve, for example, a payment dispute. I think that's correct.  
Mr Tracey:   Perhaps I could add something to M s Godden's answer, if it's helpful. The orders that are 
available to the Fair Work Commission in resolving a dispute under 66MA are that the employee either continue 
to be treated as a casual employee, so that order in and of itself provides certainty to parties about the status of the 
employee. Alternatively, an order could be made that the employee be treated as a full -time or part -time employee 
from the first day of the employee's next full pay period. So, either way, the arbitrated outcome from the 
commission informs parties how to proceed with respect to classification.  
Ms Godden:   I'm sorry; I did misspeak. It's not required to be 'consent arbitration'. So the Fair Work 
Commission could use mediation, conciliation or arbitration, including without consent; I apologise.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Tell me about the consultation that the department did in relation to the new 
definition of 'casual employment'. Can you just step me through what consultation, if any, there was with 
stakeholders?  
Ms Williams:   It was extensive consultation.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Specifically on the definition that we happily just stated.  
Ms Yanchenko:   We had a range of meetings with a range of stakeholders over some months. If you want 
something more specific than that, we will have to take it on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But when did they first see the definition? Would it have been when the legislation 
was released?  
Ms James:   There was consultation based on concepts, some of which was public, and discussions with certain 
stakeholders. In terms of stakeholders seeing draft legislation, that tends to happen through our COIL process, our 
Committee on Industrial Legislation. That is a narrower range of stakeholders. A much more formal process 
occurs quite close to introduction because that is when we have drafts. So, if you're asking specifically about — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The definition of 'casual' we have been through; the non -exhaustive list we have — 
Mr Manning:   We can provide on notice detail of the consultation period over time, including the specific 
question of the exact date when stakeholders would have first seen a draft definition.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, let's come back after the break and explore that. I am keen to understand when 
stakeholders first saw the definition as it is now legislated. Was that part of the COIL , or was some information 
distributed to people on which feedback was sought prior to COIL ? 
Mr Manning:   I am not sure whether we have that detail.  
Ms Williams:   We might need to take that on notice. I am not sure whether we can get that over the break. 
Prior to the draft legislation there were some written submission processes on the Closing Loopholes measures. I 
can confer with my colleague at the break but, as I recall, there were two written submission processes in March 
and April last year. We met with stakeholders to talk them through elements of the definition during that process. 
The exact details we would have to take on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We will come back after the break.  
Proceedings suspended from 16:02 to 16:15  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   When did stakeholders first see the new definition of 'casual employment'?  
Ms Maddock:   Senator, I'll take that question. I'll talk about it in terms of casuals being part of the broader 
public consultation process that the department undertook as part of closing loopholes; then I can get to the 
specifics of when they saw — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Just to help you here —of course, we've been through the inquiry, so I have the 
background —I specifically want to know when all stakeholders, but employers in particular, first saw the new 
definition of 'casual employment' that is in the legislation; was it in the COIL  or before that?  
Ms Maddock:   Prior to a COIL  that occurred, there was a meeting with employer representatives and unions 
on 16 June that went through where the departmental thinking was at in terms of a number of the closing 
loopholes measures, and that included casuals. It wasn't the actual legislation at that time, but it was providing Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 71 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  them with oversight, at a principles level, of where it was headed to; then the COIL  occurred on 16 and 17 August 
2023.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So that's when they would have first seen that non-exhaustive list.  
Ms Maddock:   That's when they would have seen the version of the legislation at that time.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But it was, of course, a select group of stakeholders that was involved in the COIL . 
Ms Maddock:   That's right. That's our National Workplace Relations Consultative Council, which is made up 
of employer representatives and unions. The other side of it is our state and territory government representatives.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   For everyone else, it would have been when the legislation was first tabled or first 
presented in the House of Representatives; is that correct?  
Ms Maddock:   In terms of the department's role in facilitating consultation on the legislation, that's the process 
that we undertook.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The Ombudsman's website also states that an employee who starts as a casual will 
stay casual until their employment status changes, and we were discussing this a little bit before. Can you explain 
how that will work? It states:  
Employees who start as a casual, will stay casual until their employment status changes either through:  
a conversion process or Fair Work Commission order, or  
accepting an alternative employment offer and starting work on that basis.  
Is that correct, and how would it actually work?  
Mr Tracey:   Yes. In answer to the first part of your question, that is correct. They are the provisions at 
subsection 15A(5) which Ms Godden and I spoke to earlier. In terms of how that will actually work in practice, 
the employee notification provisions are set out at new section 66AAB. Effectively, that provides that an 
employee can, subject to a certain amount of time passing and certain criteria being met, issue their employer with 
a written notification, indicating that they wish to change from casual to permanent. In terms of the practicality, 
the legislation doesn't dictate specifically what form or what notice needs to be provided; it just needs to be in 
writing.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In terms of an employee who starts as a casual but then is entitled to have their status 
change, what triggers that? It says here that it is a conversion process or the Fair Work Commission order; is that 
right? The Fair Work Commission can order it?  
Mr Tracey:   Indeed, the Fair Work Commission can, in the course of resolving a dispute between an employee 
and an employer that flows from this notification process. For instance, if a notification is issued and the 
employer thinks they have fair and reasonable operational grounds to refuse that notification and there is a dispute 
that ensues between the parties, they can then go to the commission if that can't be resolved at the workplace 
level. That's the order that the commission would give to clarify and confirm the status of the employment 
relationship.  
Ms Godden:   But, again, that's not a dispute at large; that's a dispute that arises if and when the casual 
conversion right arises.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In that individual situation.  
Mr Manning:   The other factor that we shouldn't gloss over is that they can agree. They might seek to 
commence the conversion process and the employer might acknowledge and agree; then they can convert. It 
doesn't have to go to the Fair Work Commission.  
Ms Godden:   Certainly not, and the legislation leaves flexibility for employers and employees to agree a 
change in status at any time. If it suits them and both parties are agreeable, they can just go for it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Let's say that I'm a small business owner. Who would be the ultimate arbiter of how 
someone is employed in a business, like my small business? Is it the Fair Work — 
Mr Manning:   If they're doing it by agreement, it's both of them; but, of course, the business owner would 
have to agree. If it's occurring subject to a dispute like the one we outlined earlier then it's the commission who 
makes the decision.  
Ms Godden:   But it's really no different from the situation in a broader employment context, in that I can make 
an offer of employment to anyone, whether that's on a permanent or casual basis; if they don't agree then we don't 
have a contract.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 72 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The problem is that we don't have an exhaustive list now, and it could be any other 
matter. Previously, whatever was on the contract was agreed to between the two parties, whereas now it has to 
comply with a list that could be added to. If there is a dispute and an employer is unsure or in disagreement with 
the employee, it then has to be resolved by the Fair Work Commission; is that right?  
Mr Manning:   If it's pursued.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If it's pursued. The ultimate arbiter of how someone is employed within that small 
business is not the business owner; it's the — 
Ms Godden:   I would say that's the same under the current definition. If an employer and an employee 
disagree about the application of the factors in section 15A(2) now, they may choose to take that disagreement to 
a court, for example, to determine what the appropriate status is. In that instance, if there's a dispute that goes to 
court, the small business owner is not the ultimate arbiter. Quite properly, it would be our judicial system.  
Mr Manning:   Also relevant to this is the estimate we did in the impact analysis equivalent, which was that, at 
the maximum, only 10 per cent in early days might seek to convert and, over time, as people became more 
familiar with the process, that would reduce to five. What that shows, in our understanding, is that it will be the 
parties in the workplace, in the vast majority of cases, who'll be doing it. Even when there's perhaps the potential 
for disagreement, it will still be the parties, and it will be a much smaller subset who might go on formal dispute 
resolution.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What are the precise eligibility criteria for employees to notify their employer of 
their intention to change to permanent employment?  
Mr Tracey:   This is the section 66AAB provision that I mentioned a short while ago. A casual employee can 
give their employer written notification that they wish to change from casual to permanent, if they have had 
regard to the definition at section 15A and they no longer believe that they meet that definition of casual 
employment. There's also a requirement that they don't have a dispute with their employer on foot at the moment, 
in order to avoid any clash of process. Also, for employees in small businesses, at least 12 months needs to have 
elapsed and, for other businesses, it's at least six months. They are the broad strokes of the provision.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'm sorry; I missed that last bit.  
Mr Tracey:   They are the broad strokes; in summary, they are the criteria.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The FWO website states that the employer must consult with the employee before 
responding to a casual conversion notification. What must this consultation process entail?  
Ms Godden:   The legislation doesn't specify the form of the consultation process; it specifies that consultation 
must occur.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That it must occur?  
Ms Godden:   That it must occur, but it leaves flexibility there so that it can be tailored for different employers 
and what the circumstances are.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Under what specific conditions can an employer refuse a casual conversion 
notification?  
Mr Tracey:   An employer can refuse a notification if they disagree with the employee about whether the 
employee still meets the definition of casual employment at section 15A. They can also refuse if there are fair and 
reasonable operational grounds for not accepting the notification and also in circumstances where accepting the 
notification would be inconsistent with a Commonwealth, state or territory recruitment law and process.  On the 
fair and reasonable operational ground specifically, the act does provide a non -exhaustive list of what amounts to 
a fair and reasonable operational ground. Such grounds include where there might be substantial changes required 
to the way that work is organised, where there would be significant impacts on the operation of the enterprise, and 
where there would need to be substantial changes to the employee's terms and conditions to avoid contravening 
the terms of a Fair Work instrument.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you give me an example of a substantial change? Can you give me a bit of a 
cameo of what a substantial change would look like in the way that the business is organised where the 
commission would consider it to be fair and reasonable?  
Mr Tracey:   I might reflect on that for a moment, unless one of my colleagues has an example that has come 
to mind.  
Ms Godden:   The one that comes to mind —I don't know whether Ms Williams wants to jump in here —is 
where, for example, the firm advance commitment might be to a certain number of hours, which you would Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 73 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  expect it to be, so six hours a week. If that person were engaged permanent part -time, there may be award 
minimum engagement requirements that, for example, would require that person to be engaged for a minimum of 
12 hours a week or a minimum of 20 hours a week. I'm sorry; I can't bring to mind the name of the award.  
Ms Williams:   The hospitality award has an eight -hour minimum engagement period for part -time employees. 
That's an example of where it would be a fair and reasonable operational ground because, regarding converting 
someone who works six hours, there is no part -time employment available at six hours a week under the 
hospitality award.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is that in relation to a change?  
Ms Williams:   That's the ground in relation to not contravening the term of an industrial instrument; so, in that 
case, it's the hospitality award. In terms of a substantial change, it may be things like the conversion requiring an 
impact on other employees, requiring them to change their hours or their way of work; that would be a substantial 
change in the way work is conducted.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you give me an example of a significant impact on business operations that you 
would deem fair and reasonable?  
Ms Godden:   With the way that the factors are framed, if there are significant impacts on the operation of the 
employer's enterprise, that would suggest that it is not fair and reasonable.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you restate that?  
Ms Godden:   I'm sorry; I think I've said that the wrong way around. Perhaps I could put it in the positive. 
Section 66AAC(5), says that, for the purposes of paragraph (4)(b), fair and reasonable operational grounds for not 
accepting the notification include the following: (b) there would be significant impacts on the operation of the 
employer's enterprise. So it is a fair and reasonable operational ground that there would be significant impacts on 
the operation of the employer's enterprise.  
Mr Manning:   It doesn't have to be significant operational grounds in circumstances where it's fair — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If a small business believes that the refusal that they've made is fair and reasonable 
but the Fair Work Commission disagrees with them, will they be subject to any penalties?  
Mr Tracey:   If there's a disagreement between an employer and an employee around relying on these grounds, 
I think where you're going is that it would trigger a dispute, which is what we talked about, and the commission 
then makes an order. The commission is not going to impose penalties on the employer; it is simply going to 
make an order setting the classification of the employee either to remain as a casual or to be full time or part time, 
and that's what the status would be going forward.  
Mr Manning:   The statutory offset that exists would continue to exist in those circumstances.  
Mr Tracey:   Indeed it would. But the effect of the order, just to be clear, would be prospective in its 
application. It wouldn't change the fact that the employee had been casual up to the point of this dispute occurring 
and the commission making the order; it would only be that there would be a change in status, going forward, if 
that's what the commission determined.  
Ms Godden:   Put another way: the Fair Work Commission's powers are to resolve the dispute.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   There is no incentive for a business to refuse every conversion request; is that right?  
Ms Godden:   In terms of their relationship with their employees and being good corporate citizens, we would 
expect businesses to look at the requirements, look at the guidance published by the Fair Work Ombudsman, 
honestly apply the legislative requirements and come out with the result that they thought was the correct one in 
the circumstances, having regard to those factors.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   This might be a question for the commission : what specific procedures does the 
commission follow to resolve casual conversion disputes?  
Ms Godden:   In the first instance, they need to look at conciliation or mediation before looking at arbitration 
in the majority of cases. In terms of the actual process, the Fair Work Commission is obviously a very mature 
tribunal. I expect they could talk in more detail to the processes that they will set up to support this.  
Mr Manning:   They could talk about any changes to those processes, noting that after the provisions 
commence there's an eligibility period, after which dispute can be brought. They will be able to speak to you 
tomorrow about what they're putting in place to be ready for that.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What criteria do they use to arbitrate a casual conversion dispute?  
Mr Manning:   Broadly, they would have to have decided that the other, less formal methods of dispute 
resolution aren't going to be worked out and that they believe they could arbitrate in the interests of fairness.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 74 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   They are the steps; what are the criteria?  
Ms Godden:   The Fair Work Commission's powers are to deal with the dispute. They must first deal with the 
dispute by means other than arbitration —unless there are exceptional circumstances, and then they deal with the 
dispute by arbitration, in accordance with section 66MA. I was reading to you from section 66M(6). If we are 
proceeding to arbitration, the Fair Work Commission must not make an order unless it considers that it would be 
fair and reasonable to make the order. It would do that by having a look at what the dispute is and coming to a fair 
and reasonable resolution of the dispute.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you confirm: can casual employees be hired on fixed -term contracts? Can you 
be hired for a fixed period of time?  
Ms Williams:   Yes, you can, unless you are employed under the higher education awards.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. I won't go there. Can that be renewed, up to a point? Is there a limit to how 
long that can be renewed for?  
Ms Williams:   If you are employed as a casual with an identified end date, you will be subject to the fixed -
term contract limitations. If you're employed as a casual for two years or two consecutive contracts, at that point 
in time you'll be taken to be a casual employee and you will be able to utilise your right to conversion.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you have a specific example of how the new casual employment rules apply to 
fixed -term contracts in various sectors? Take hospitality. If you hire someone over the Christmas period but you 
want to continue them, what are the scenarios there that an employer would have to consider?  
Ms Williams:   They would have to consider whether the person was lawfully engaged at commencement and 
then over a period of time, depending on the length of the fixed -term contract and the arrangement. For example, 
they could have been employed over the Christmas period but then have continued that employment on a shift -by-
shift basis after that identifiable period has concluded. Then they would be subject to the casual employment 
rules, similarly to any other employer.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Say the relationship has just continued, which is often the case. I can think of my 
daughter, who started as a Christmas casual and continued beyond that as a casual, under the previous rules. What 
steps should the employer take, if they've mistakenly engaged a casual employee or continued with them, to 
remedy that?  
Ms Williams:   No steps, provided that they're engaged correctly at engagement, and it sounds in this case as 
though they were. When they were first engaged, they had no firm advance commitment to continuing, indefinite 
employment because, as you say, they were just employed for the Christmas period. The employer does not need 
to do anything further unless and until a conscious and specified event occurs. For example, if your daughter 
worked for a small business, after 12 months she might say, 'I'd like to be permanent. I think I no longer meet the 
definition of casual.' In that case, the employer would need to make an assessment of her employment.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Does there need to be any change if they just continue?  
Ms Williams:   No change.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If they just continue to work beyond the Christmas casual period, working every 
Thursday night?  
Ms James:   Yes, working a regular pattern of work.  
Ms Williams:   That's correct. There is no change because they've been employed as a genuine casual at 
commencement —that is, they did not have a firm advance commitment. They were just coming on to help over 
Christmas. They are employed correctly. There needs to be no change after that, unless the employee takes an 
action to initiate a change, and then the employer would need to look at the relationship and all the conduct of that 
relationship that has occurred.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If, say, a two -year period or a 12 -month period goes past and the employee thinks, 'I 
should have been part time because I've worked every Thursday and every Saturday,' is there any recourse for 
them?  
Ms Williams:   There is recourse through a court process, through small claims or a Federal Court process. The 
important thing to remember in that regard is that the changes passed as closing loopholes did not make any 
changes to section 545A, which was part of the previous government's casual employment reforms. It says that if 
you do arrive at a court process as part of a misclassification on engagement, in awarding any back pay the court 
must take into account the casual loading already paid.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 75 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Manning:   If I could just clarify: if they are continuing to work, that continues until one of those four 
events that we've discussed occurs.  
Ms Godden:   This court angle is only relevant if someone is misclassified on engagement. If they're correctly 
engaged as a casual and they just continue —they are just working every Thursday and Saturday —and then they 
think that, after two years, they should have been a part -time employee, at that point they could ask to convert 
prospectively. But there wouldn't be any recourse because they were correctly engaged on employment.  
Ms James:   I am conscious that we are getting into both abstract and hypothetical territory here. I thank the 
officers for working with it, albeit based on the real -life story of your daughter, but when you tell — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It could be anyone's daughter.  
Ms James:   The story is a familiar one: a Christmas casual. I wouldn't bet my house on it, but I bet she was 
working more hours to start with, because if you are a Christmas casual you tend to be working those extra 
shopping hours around Christmas. If the intention was , 'I am hiring you as a Christmas casual' , and that was the 
genuine intention of both parties at the time, there hasn't been any misrepresentation of the relationship here; it 
has just evolved, which is not at all uncommon for casual workers.  When Ms Williams is talking about the court 
and the possibility of more serious proceedings, we're really talking there about a case where there haven't been 
good intentions from the start: someone was put on as a Christmas casual with the full intention of keeping them 
working those hours. Unless the hours remain pretty regularised, I think you're falling out of the provisions. 
Albeit hypothetical and abstract here, we're falling out of the provisions. I don't think that scenario is very likely 
with that set of hypothetical facts.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The reason for trying to bring it down to a cameo is that employers are trying to 
understand this and what it means to them, and it's not clear —particularly given that, as we've been through 
already, there's not an exhaustive list; there could be other factors. Employers are concerned about what it will 
mean and the retrospective impact on them. You're saying that it can't occur; it would be prospective. How many 
casuals is the government expecting will convert under the new definition?  
Mr Manning:   I touched on the impact analysis equivalent earlier. We operated on an assumption that it could 
be 10 per cent at the outset —Ms Williams will help me —going down to five per cent over what period of time?  
Ms Williams:   From years six to 10.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is that people who wouldn't have otherwise had the opportunity?  
Mr Manning:   That was an examination of the total number of casual employees, not, for example, a different 
subset of those who have a conversion process right now. Again, I'll get Ms Williams to continue.  
Ms Williams:   What we did was look at casual employees who have a regular pattern of work and are 
guaranteed minimum hours or pay in the 12 months beyond that. I think we got a figure there of 852,000 potential 
casual employees. Then we took the rates: 10 per cent of that in years one to five, and then five per cent in years 
six to 10.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Did you calculate a difference between the old definition and the new? People have 
the right to convert already. Was there a calculation done or is there any data on how many people were 
converting under the old definition?  
Ms Williams:   There is a wide range of data on conversions. We did commission a review of the casuals 
amendments in 2021, as part of the statutory review of the supporting Australia's jobs and economic recovery act, 
which passed the parliament. What some quantitative and qualitative analysis found was that around 25 per cent 
of those surveyed had converted. There is a wide range, anecdotally, of conversion statistics. I am just trying to 
remember. Recruitment and Consulting Services Australia had a rate of around four per cent. There was quite a 
lot of evidence given as part of the committee process.  Again, people only convert if they want to convert. It does 
depend. I think there were some larger retailers who had older profile workers, their workers were older, and in 
that we saw a higher conversion rate. It goes back to what I said earlier about the age and stage of people's lives 
perhaps determining when conversion may be appropriate for them.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you know, or is this a question I've got to put to the commission: can you outline 
any extra resources that have been allocated to the Fair Work Commission specifically for dealing with casual 
conversion disputes?  
Ms Williams:   I wouldn't say 'disputes'.  
Ms Yanchenko:   In terms of the funding from last year —so the 2023 -24 budget —the Fair Work Commission 
received $1.957 million over the forward estimates to assist with the casual conversion process.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Specifically for the casual conversion process?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 76 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Yanchenko:   Yes. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Any additional staff?  
Ms Yanchenko:   That included two ASL.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   And what about the ombudsman ? Were they specifically for this issue?  
Ms Yanchenko:   I don't believe so. Although, as the secretary pointed out earlier, in this year's budget the Fair 
Work Ombudsman did receive some funding to their ongoing employer advisory service, which is particularly 
available for small businesses —so there is additional money to make that service ongoing.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Will employers be liable for any costs as a result of the Fair Work Commission 
dispute resolution, apart from their own cost that they might incur?  
Ms Godden:   It is a no -cost jurisdiction. Just before we swap the call, would it be possible to get back to you 
on the matter that we undertook prior to the break, namely, what the penalty units are with respect to the failure to 
provide a casual employment information statement, please?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. Thank you.  
Mr Tracey:   I referred to the act in the break. Contravention of national employment standards attracts 
maximum penalty units of 60. A single penalty unit is $313. If we times that out by 60, it's $18,780 as the 
maximum penalty that could be imposed by a court.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you for coming back to me with that.  
Senator CASH:   Can I ask some questions in terms of the statutorily  mandated review in the operation of the 
secure jobs, better pay  provisions. Has that commenced?  
Mr Manning:   Not yet.  
Senator CASH:   When is it meant to commence? What's the date?  
Mr Manning:   Towards the end of this year is the latest at which it could commence. It can commence earlier.  
Senator CASH:   Just remind me what the legislation said in terms of the review provisions.  
Mr Cains:   The review of the secure jobs, better pay  act needs to commence by 6 December 2024. It needs to 
report within six months of commencement of the review.  
Senator CASH:   Does the government intend on completing the work internally or through the use of external 
providers or consultancies?  
Mr Manning:   Decisions haven't been made by the government yet about how the review operates.  
Senator CASH:   No decisions have been made. On that basis then, I will assume that you have not sought any 
quotes from external providers to undertake the review?  
Mr Manning:   No.  
Senator CASH:   Does the government intend on undertaking a survey and interview process of employers in 
terms of undertaking the review?  
Mr Manning:   It hasn't made any decisions about format of the review.  
Mr Cains:   That is correct, Mr Manning. Typically these processes obviously involve significant consultation 
processes, submission processes et cetera.  
Senator CASH:   The review requires that any unintended consequences of the secure jobs, better pay  Act be 
identified. What's the thought process behind ensuring that unintended consequences are properly identified?  
Mr Cains:   We expect that those sorts of issues would be identified through the consultation process, with 
reference to the policy intent of the legislation.  
Senator CASH:   But I'm assuming that, obviously, more thought will go into that process and how it will 
actually work?  
Mr Manning:   It goes back to Mr Cain s's point around board consultation being a normal part of this review, 
so that parties have an opportunity to bring those to the attention of the review.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of the independent statutory review of the Fair Work Amendment (Paid Family 
and Domestic Violence Leave) Act 2022, can I just confirm that the government engaged Flinders University to 
conduct that independent review?  
Mr Manning:   That's my memory. I will get Ms Williams to come back to the table and talk you through that.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 77 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Can you confirm that Flinders University was engaged by the government; and, to date, what 
is the total cost of the review?  
Ms Williams:   It isn't all paid out. My recollection is that the contract value with Flinders University is 
$266,006.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you very much for that specificity.  
Ms Yanchenko:   I can confirm that, yes, it is Flinders University that has been engaged. As Ms Williams has 
said, not all that funding is paid out. There are several milestones in the contract.  
Senator CASH:   When do you anticipate that review will be finalised?  
Ms Yanchenko:   It commenced on 16 May, and it is due to be completed within three months. We expect it to 
be finalised on 16 August.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of the review, did the government write directly to stakeholders asking them to 
participate, or did they write to them notifying them of Flinders University's appointment as the reviewer?  
Ms Williams:   One of the things we've been conscious of with this review is that it was required to start not 
long after provisions had been in operation; so, one year. Also the statutory timeframe of three months is quite 
short to get stakeholders' engagement. We have been going through a process of updating stakeholders along the 
way as to the status of the review. We held some consultation sessions at the end of last year with interested 
stakeholders, including unions, employers, academics and representatives from the family and domestic violence 
sector to say, 'Look, the review will be commencing next year, and we will keep you updated.' We did notify 
stakeholders that the review would shortly commence, who the reviewer was and how to participate in the review.  
Senator CASH:   Did the government review the university's work plan or proposal?  
Ms Yanchenko:   The department did, yes.  
Senator CASH:   Did you have any concerns with it?  
Ms Yanchenko:   I wouldn't say we had concerns with it. To Ms Williams' s point earlier, the review is to be 
conducted in quite a short timeframe, so the focus of our conversations with Flinders University were ensuring 
that everything possible was done as part of that work plan to make sure that it was the most effective and 
efficient review possible, again having regard to that three -month timeframe.  
Senator CASH:   Does Flinders University, as the reviewer, have a roundtable consultation plan, in particular 
given the operation of the amendments made on small businesses and sole traders?  
Ms Williams:   They do. They have had some roundtable consultations. I can take on notice exactly the status. 
There were some last week. Some are also occurring this week. They have been targeted to specific interest 
groups. They have held one with employers, they have held some with unions and they have held some with the 
family and domestic violence sector, as well as some with academics.  
Senator CASH:   I might get you to provide on notice those different consultation plans and who has attended 
each one. Is there one specifically for small businesses and sole traders, given the impact of the amendments on 
those two groups specifically mentioned?  
Ms Williams:   My recollection is that there are a number of sessions for employers. I'm not sure whether they 
are expressly described as 'for small business and sole traders', but I would say that the department has made all 
best efforts through multiple networks to ensure that employers, including small -business representatives, are 
advised that the review is upcoming and how to participate in the review.  
Senator CASH:   My concern is that the bill itself, as you know, requires that the minister must cause an 
independent review, which has now occurred in terms of Flinders University, to be conducted into the operation 
of the amendments made by the bill on (a) small business; (b) sole traders; and (c) people experiencing family and 
domestic violence. I've had concerns raised by small business that there is not a specific plan to consult with 
them. As you would appreciate, they often don't want to necessarily be part of stakeholder groups with larger 
businesses because they feel their voices are not necessarily heard. What can we do to ensure that you do 
specifically consult not only with small businesses but also with sole traders?  
Ms Williams:   What we could do  is that we can take that back so that we are working closely with the review 
team. Obviously they are an independent reviewer, but in terms of that outreach —ensuring they reach the right 
people —we definitely have made representatives aware that they can participate in these consultations. We can 
take that back and talk to the review team.  
Senator CASH:   It would be a little odd, you would have to admit, given that, as I said, the minister must 
cause an independent review to be conducted of the operation of the amendments made by the bill on small Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 78 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  businesses and sole traders and people experiencing family and domestic violence that wasn't then specifically 
looked at by the reviewer?  
Ms Williams:   I wouldn't characterise it in that way. I am aware that — 
Senator CASH:   Deficient.  
Ms Williams:   As part of those roundtable consultations there are questions that go to those three categories 
that you have identified. Also,  as part of the online questionnaire there are questions that go to that. We can take 
that away.  
Senator CASH:   Did the university undertake any outreach to small businesses or sole traders in particular to 
ensure that they had appropriate time to consult or to make submissions?  
Ms Williams:   The consultations are ongoing as we speak. In terms of ensuring that key stakeholders were 
aware that the review was coming and the timeframe from that, the department undertook considerable efforts 
through all available channels to make parties aware of that.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'considerable efforts', what do you define as considerable efforts and to whom 
were those considerable efforts made or directed at?  
Ms Williams:   As I said, in December 2023 the department held information sessions with a range of 
stakeholders, including employee representatives, who attended those sessions in December. We can take that on 
notice. They included COSBOA, the Australian Hairdressing Council, ARIA and the National Retail Association. 
They are some of the stakeholders that did attend. Many more were invited. Those stakeholders were updated on 
9 May and 16 May via email that the review would shortly commence, and indeed has commenced, including 
information on how to participate in the review.  
Senator CASH:   Just to ensure that small businesses and sole traders in particular are properly heard, given the 
nature of the review and the fact that it is specifically looking at the impact on them, can I ask that you review the 
university's consultation plan to determine whether it is in fact consistent with the clear requirements to review 
the impacts of the changes on small businesses and sole traders, because that's where the concerns I am getting are 
actually coming from.  
Ms Williams:   Absolutely.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I don't know whether this is the right place for the questions, but they are fairly simple 
questions. You will be able to tell me where the right place is if I'm wrong.  My first set of questions relates to a 
recent Senate second reading motion to a Fair Work Act bill. The motion requires the government to conduct an 
investigation into massive wage theft occurring in the coalmining industry. I will read the motion. The part that is 
relevant states:  
but the Senate:  
(b) requires the Government to investigate claims that casual miners working under enterprise agreements in the black coal 
mining industry are, and have been, underpaid; and  
(c) if underpayments are found to have occurred, facilitate the reimbursement of the underpayments;  
Ms Yanchenko:   Thanks . We're certainly aware of that motion.  
Senator ROBERTS:   This is Australia's largest wage theft case, totalling possibly over $1 billion and 
involving thefts of up to $40,000 per year per miner, stealing from 5,000 or more coalminers. When was the 
Senate's second reading amendment to your government's latest Fair Work Act amendment bill conveyed to the 
minister?  
Mr Manning:   I am not sure, in the sense that we wouldn't necessarily have conveyed it to the minister.  
Ms Yanchenko:   We were watching along in real time.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Did you convey that to the minister?  
Ms Yanchenko:   I didn't personally, no.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Is it possible to find out when the minister — 
Mr Manning:   When he first became aware of it?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes.  
Mr Manning:   We will have to take that on notice.  
Senator ROBERTS:   That is fine. I don't expect you to know everything; most things, but not everything. I 
take it then that no discussions have been held between the minister and the department?  
Mr Manning:   We are still thinking through our advice to the minister; so, no, not yet.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 79 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   Has the department received or made any instructions?  
Mr Manning:   We haven't yet given advice or a submission to the minister about the motion. We are still 
working through it.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So you haven't made any instructions to him or given him any advice?  
Mr Manning:   Not as yet.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Has Minister Burke discussed with you the nature of the investigation the Senate 
required him to make into wage theft involving Central Queensland and Hunter Valley miners?  
Mr Manning:   No, not yet.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Have any of your staff raised it with you?  
Ms Wettinger:   At this stage we haven't discussed the matter with any of the minister's staff, no.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Who do you expect will have a role in the investigation?  
Mr Manning:   It is too early to say. There is a long history to the matter — 
Senator ROBERTS:   A very long history.  
Mr Manning:   So that's what we are considering in terms of getting ready for those discussions and that advice 
to the minister.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Minister, what would you expect of a fair and independent investigation?  
Senator Watt:   That it be fair and independent.  
Senator ROBERTS:   What would characterise a fair and independent investigation?  
Senator Watt:   I think everyone understands what those concepts mean. I know you have an interest in the 
conditions of coalminers. Have you caught up on the good news about the first decision or agreement resulting 
from our 'Closing Loopholes' laws?  
Senator ROBERTS:   I am aware that there is an agreement in application.  
Senator Watt:   I think there might even be a couple, actually.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I am aware of two.  
Senator Watt:   It is good news that we are seeing coalminers receive what they are entitled to as a result of 
our legislation. I don't think you voted for that legislation, Senator.  
Senator ROBERTS:   We'll hear more about that. I have already told you why publicly, Senator Watt.  
Senator Watt:   It is delivering more money to coalminers.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'll have more to ask you about that tomorrow, with glee.  
Senator Watt:   Sure.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I turn to right -of-entry permits. While officials are coming to the table I will ask the 
first question. There might be someone already there who can answer it. What is the purpose of a right -of-entry 
permit being granted by the Fair Work Commission?  
Ms Godden:   I might start, and Mr Tracey can add if I answer you at too high a level. Part 34 of the Fair Work 
Act provides for the rights of officials of registered organisations who are also permit holders to enter premises, to 
hold discussions with their members or prospective members, or to investigate suspected breaches of the act 
involving a member.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Would you agree that holding a right -of-entry permit is a privilege?  
Ms Godden:   It gives you certain rights under the Fair Work Act that you would not otherwise have.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Right -of-entry permits are valid for three years unless revoked or suspended. Could 
you outline for me the circumstance under which someone would have their permit revoked under the 
government's legislation?  
Ms Godden:   I will turn to that part of my copy of the act. Mr Tracey might jump in if he gets there before me.  
Mr Tracey:   Section 508 of the Fair Work Act provides powers for the Fair Work Commission about when 
they may restrict the rights of officials who hold entry permits. The commission can do this by application or on 
its own motion. In summary, the circumstances in which he can do this are when there are breaches of fair work 
laws. There are also some circumstances where, because the commission must be satisfied at the outset when 
someone applies for a permit that they are a fit -and-proper person, if circumstances come to light where that is Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 80 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  casting doubt, there might be cause to reconsider the issuance of a permit or whether certain conditions should be 
imposed on it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Given that the right -of-entry permit carries significant rights and privileges, has the 
government considered any changes to the Fair Work Act that give the Fair Work Commission the power to place 
temporary restrictions on those facing significant charges, especially those involving offences against women, or 
particularly violent offences?  
Ms Godden:   That would be a matter for government.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister?  
Senator Watt:   Senator, do you mind repeating the question?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Given the fact that right -of-entry permits carry significant rights and significant 
privileges, has the government considered any changes to the Fair Work Act that give the Fair Work 
Commissioner power to place temporary restrictions on those facing charges, especially those facing charges 
against women or who are particularly violent?  
Senator Watt:   I would have to take it on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you outline for me how the granting of a right -of-entry permit by the Fair Work 
Commission to Mr Edmond Margjini, a former gang member who is currently facing charges relating to the 
violent home invasion of a woman, is appropriate?  
Ms James:   Specific matters need to be referred to the relevant regulator. I don't think we can comment on 
specific cases.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You can't comment on this particular case? I have a document I can refer to. It seems 
that Mr Margjini is able to use a loophole. Does the government consider that Mr Margjini's ability to get a right -
of-entry permit through a loophole in the Fair Work Act means that the loophole might need to be closed?  
Mr Manning:   I cannot really comment on the specifics of a case we are not familiar with.  
Ms James:   I refer this question to the general manager of the Fair Work Commission. They are appearing 
tomorrow. As Mr Tracey read out, under section 508 of the Fair Work Act the Fair Work Commission has the 
ability to restrict rights that are excisable or suspend or revoke those entry permits.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But they can only enforce the law as it stands. In this case, it seems that Mr Margjini 
is exploiting a loophole that needs to be tightened up for those who have been charged. Even if it were placing a 
temporary hold on their right -of-entry permit, that could be quite easily resolved, could it not, by way of some 
amendments?  
Ms James:   I don't understand what the loophole is here. It might be because I am not particularly familiar 
with the facts in this case.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   He has been charged; it hasn't gone all the way through to a conviction. There is this 
intervening period where he still has this right -of-entry permit.  
Ms James:   I would caution —perhaps this is the lawyer in me coming to the fore —that there is a presumption 
of innocence that is only overturned in quite serious circumstances. This is something that we can go away and 
make sure we have considered — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   These are serious charges. In most other workplaces they might be temporarily stood 
down without pay or there would be some sort of remedy to deal with the risk that is there for other workers or 
other workplaces. We see this routinely across other sections of the economy in the labour force. This seems to be 
a loophole that could easily be resolved, even if temporary restrictions were placed on a person's right -of-entry 
permit.  
Mr Manning:   We are not familiar with the matter or the details beyond the article which has just been given 
to us. So we are unable to comment, beyond saying that ultimately it is going to be a decision for government as 
to whether or not any amendments are needed because of this case or generally. We are unable to comment on the 
operation of it without knowing more about it. As Ms Godden said, the Fair Work Commission can perhaps 
comment on it tomorrow when they are before you.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We will put these questions to the Fair Work Commission, but they can only enforce 
the law as it is currently in place. Minister, are you not concerned about a former gang member having been 
charged, and violent offenders roaming free across our nation's workplaces?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 81 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   As has already been stated, these allegations will be tested. I am pretty wary of coalition 
senators coming in here and making allegations about union officials —I have seen it many times before —only to 
find out that the cases fall over. This one might be upheld. We should let the relevant tribunal do its job.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   This isn't the first instance. Isn't this a pattern of behaviour, though? We saw earlier 
that government prioritised the rights of John Setka and his construction mates over women who wanted to leave 
the CFMEU. Why are you prioritising a person — 
Senator Watt:   That's your assertion.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   with violent crimes, rather than employees of the business that he can enter?  
Senator Watt:   Sorry; say that again?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   There is an opportunity for you to deal with this quickly and simply. We have seen 
plenty of other legislation rammed through our chamber. You could resolve this issue quite simply with an 
amendment that would prevent someone who has been charged with violent crimes from having unfettered access 
to workplaces and other employees. Why is the government not prioritising this?  
Senator Watt:   Would that apply to employers as well — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Sure.  
Senator Watt:   or only to unions? How come you never ask about that?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Go there; let's do it.  
Senator Watt:   It is only ever about unions, according to the coalition.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If you want to bring forward a case, that's fine. I'm bringing you a case in which 
someone — 
Senator Watt:   Almost every question today has been about 'bad unions' and 'terrible unions'; seriously!  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I would like to have a mature exchange with you.  
Senator Watt:   So would I — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, I am asking serious questions.  
Senator Watt:   rather than a series of questions about unions, and how bad unions are.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, this is a situation where a person has been charged — 
Senator Watt:   Correct: 'charged' — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   and you are making sound effects — 
Senator Watt:   Charged. Why don't you let the tribunal do its job and determine whether it is made out or not? 
If it is, then the person should be penalised.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I see time and again businesses where someone might be stood down for a period 
until those charges have been resolved. Here, this person has continued access to workplaces and you just want to 
make sound effects in this place. Let's have a mature conversation.  
Senator Watt:   I would love to have a mature conversation, but — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You're the one doing it.  
Senator Watt:   your party is incapable of having a mature conversation about industrial relations because you 
are completely blinded — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I am trying to have it with you right now.  
Senator Watt:   by your ideological hatred of trade unions.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, I am trying to have a proper conversation about this.  
Senator Watt:   And what I am trying to say is that — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You just want to deflect it.  
Senator Watt:   this is an allegation — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You are deflecting. You are using tactics to deflect an issue here — 
Senator Watt:   No.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   that you are failing to address — 
Senator Watt:   This is an allegation; this is a charge. It should be tested. There are laws around who can and 
cannot get right -of-entry permits. Those laws should be upheld. If individuals can't meet those tests, they Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 82 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  shouldn't get that right; simple as that. But they shouldn't be thrown out just because they are a union or a union 
official.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I don't care if they are a union official or whoever it is. If someone has been charged 
with a serious violent offence against another person, are we still going to allow them to continue?  
Ms James:   Senator, perhaps — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We spoke about the specific privileges that an individual gets by having a right -of-
entry permit. They're put in place, you would argue, for good reasons.  
Senator Watt:   I would argue that it's a good thing for a union official to be able to go and check if someone is 
being paid correctly. Wouldn't you?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Why are you defending the fact that here is a person who has been charged with 
violent offences?  
Senator Watt:   That should be tested.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Violent offences. You are going to continue to allow them — 
Senator Watt:   That should be tested.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   to visit workplaces where they have a right -of-entry permit, without there being any 
check.  
Senator Watt:   What if they are found not guilty?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Then they will be fine, once it's dealt with.  
Senator Watt:   As has been pointed out, we have a rule of law in this country where people are innocent until 
proven guilty. If that individual —who I have never heard of before, never met before —has breached the law then 
he should be penalised in line with the law.  
CHAIR:   I think Ms James also had some comments to make.  
Ms James:   Firstly, it is the intention; it is the policy of the right -of-entry framework that people who hold 
right-of-entry permits be fit and proper persons. I don't want to speak about this particular case because I don't 
know enough about it and it is also before the courts. Just talking in terms of principles, a person needs to 
demonstrate to the Fair Work Commission that they are a fit and proper person. If there is evidence at the time 
that they are not, you would expect that to be considered.  I have asked the people here at the table to help me 
recall the enforcement provisions around who can hold a permit. The Fair Work Commission is the issuer of 
permits. It is also the regulator, if you like, for unions and union conduct. I will also note that conduct on site by 
someone holding a right -of-entry permit is regulated by the Fair Work Act. If a person is not behaving 
appropriately on site, there are also remedies there for an employer, and indeed penalties.  
It is a report in an article. I am not familiar with the facts. I must admit that I am a little concerned to hear that a 
lawyer might invoke a Fair Work Commission ruling in this kind of jurisdiction, as some sort of evidence as to 
character. That wouldn't be the purpose of the Fair Work Commission consideration. I don't know if the 
commissioner had before her at the time any evidence of this, noting that the charges were laid after the permit 
was sought —based on the article that I have read. That's as far as I would like to go there.  
In terms of the right -of-entry framework and the regulation around it, I am getting nodding from this side of the 
bench, which suggests they have discovered some things that they might wish to share with you.  
Ms Godden:   Just to build on what the secretary has said, section 507 of the Fair Work Act provides that the 
Fair Work Commission may, on application by a Fair Work inspector, take the following action against a permit 
holder to impose conditions on an entry permit or to suspend or revoke it, as Mr Tracey went through. In deciding 
whether to take one of those actions, the Fair Work Commission must take into account the permit qualification 
matters. These are set out at section 513(1) of the act. In summary, they are the matters that the commission must 
take into account in deciding whether the official is a fit and proper person. The permit qualification matters are:  
(a) whether the official has received appropriate training about the rights and responsibilities of a permit holder;  
(b) whether the official has ever been convicted of an offence against an industrial law;  
(c) whether the official has ever been convicted of an offence against a law of the Commonwealth, a State, a Territory or a 
foreign country, involving:  
(i) entry onto premises; or  
(ii) fraud or dishonesty; or  
(iii) intentional use of violence against another person or intentional damage or destruction of property;  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 83 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  (d) whether the official, or any other person, has ever been ordered to pay a penalty under this Act or other industrial law in 
relation to action taken by the official;  
(e) whether a permit issued to the official under this Part, or under a similar law of the Commonwealth … has been 
revoked or suspended or made subject to conditions;  
(f) whether a court, or other person or body, under a State or Territory industrial law or a State or Territory OHS law, has:  
(i) cancelled, suspended or imposed conditions on a right of entry for industrial or occupational health and safety 
purposes … 
(ii) disqualified the official from exercising, or applying for, a right of entry for industrial or occupational health and 
safety purposes … 
(g) any other matters the FWC considers relevant.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I want to refer you to another article in the AFR, on 14 June 2023. We will get that 
tabled now.  
Senator Watt:   Does it involve a union?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Mr Margjini, yes. You say you have never heard of him.  
Senator Watt:   Yes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I take what you are saying to be true. He has previously been convicted of some 
serious offences. Can a person who has been convicted seriously be considered a fit and proper person? They 
could be a convicted murderer gaining a right -of-entry permit.  
Ms Godden:   In deciding whether the official is a fit and proper person, the intentional use of violence against 
another person is one of the factors that the Fair Work Commission must take into account. As I think we've 
traversed, I'm not aware of this particular case. Specific questions could be directed to the Fair Work 
Commission. I am afraid I can't help you, beyond the framework.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The Fair Work Commission said that it did not make a submission in relation to the 
granting of this permit as it was only placed to assist with whether the official has ever been ordered to pay a 
penalty under the Fair Work Act or another industrial law. Would that mean that, under criminal law, if someone 
had committed a serious offence like violence —as far as murder —they could be granted a right -of-entry permit?  
Ms Godden:   It is a mandatory consideration that the Fair Work Commission must take into account. It 
appears that in this instance, according to the reporting I have in front of me —I am sorry; I have no way of 
verifying what is in this media report, and I am only just skimming it —Deputy President Binet did take into 
account a 10 -month stint in prison for reckless driving, because 'it had changed his life and set him on a purpose -
filled path to atone for his wrongdoing'. I am quoting from that article. It does seem that it was taken into account, 
but I really can't comment on the case more extensively than that. It is really a matter for the Fair Work 
Commission.  
Ms James:   Just to reinforce what Ms Godden has said, I am sure Commissioner Binet considered the facts 
before her and, as is her duty, weighed them up. Without having looked closely at the decision, I don't think we 
can comment on that, other than to point out the operation of the provisions and the options that exist in relation 
to constraining the use of a permit or revoking permits, in the event that people don't behave as they should when 
exercising their rights under those permits.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, if you had someone working for you directly, and if they were charged 
with a serious offence, had a history of offending and hadn't been convicted before, what sort of remedy would 
you take? Would you leave them employed, innocent until proven guilty, when you hold such a privileged 
position?  
Senator Watt:   You know that we don't do hypothetical cases in estimates. What I would say is that our 
government expects everyone on a work site, whether it be employers, workers or unions, to comply with the law, 
to treat people with respect and to not engage in intimidation. If there's any evidence of people not doing that, 
there are ways to deal with that under the law. I really can't put it any more plainly than that.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What's not hypothetical is the fact that there is an opportunity to remedy the law, 
which is enabling people who have been charged with serious offences to continue to have the privileged position 
of holding a right -of-entry permit. As you've stated, it is an important part of our industrial relations system, yet 
people are able to continue with this access even though they've got very serious charges against them. The 
government, by the way you've answered the questions, doesn't seem willing to deal with it.  
Senator Watt:   The officials have already taken you through the requirements to gain a right -of-entry permit 
and the factors that someone needs to be able to prove. That is the law. It is then a matter for the Fair Work Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 84 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Commission to apply that law, to interpret the case. If you've got quibbles about particular decisions, they really 
need to go to the Fair Work Commission.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, how much did the CFMEU donate to the Labor Party at the last election?  
Senator Watt:   Here we go. We have already been over this. You've tried that one. Michaelia tried that a few 
hours ago.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   How much?  
Senator Watt:   I don't know. She reckoned it was $4 million. I have no idea.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It was $4.3 million.  
Senator Watt:   Apparently.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You don't care? Your tone, Minister, is indicating to me — 
Senator Watt:   No. You have done this one already. Why don't you follow what each other does so that we 
don't sit here repeating things?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The point I'm wanting to make to you, Minister, is that it seems to me that if an 
organisation are paying $4.3 million in donations they get a special ride.  
Senator Watt:   Well, that's your view.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Why don't you do something about it?  
Senator Watt:   The CFMEU, along with every other union, are required to follow the law. If they are not 
following the law then there are ways to deal with that.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The law; that's right. The law is not allowing the Fair Work Commission to prevent 
this guy from having access to workplaces.  
Senator Watt:   We are going round and round in circles.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts is asking for the call. Is there a follow -up question?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I am happy for Senator Roberts to have the call.  
Senator ROBERTS:   My questions are to the minister. The wage theft that I talked about, Australia's largest 
wage theft case, was not due to an employer's deliberate or mistaken underpayment. Rather, Minister, are you 
aware that it was due to, firstly, collusion between the CFMEU mining division and labour hire firms, including 
an Australian subsidiary of the world's largest labour hire firm, Recruit Holdings of Japan, making illegal the 
enterprise agreements that the CFMEU signed? Secondly, it could not have occurred without the approval of the 
Fair Work Commission. Thirdly, major multinational global mining corporations benefited financially. Are you 
aware of those three things from the last few years?  
Senator Watt:   I think they are the same things that you've asked about in every other estimates hearing since 
we've been in government; so, yes.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You are aware. Thank you. Minister, I haven't asked this one.  
Senator Watt:   I am not sure about that. I feel like we've been here before.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You might be coming here again. Minister, are you aware that over a period of two 
years —I can get the years for you, but I've left the document in my office —Abelshore, which is a 100 per cent 
owned subsidiary of Glencore, paid the CFMEU $48 million?  
Senator Watt:   I was not aware of that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I think it was $9 million in one year, and in the second year it was $39 million; totalling 
about $48 million. With the CFMEU being a well -known conduit of campaign funds to the Labor Party, are you 
aware of whether or not Glencore did indeed make such a payment circuitously, and did any of that money flow 
to the Labor Party?  
Senator Watt:   I have no idea. It sounds like an outrageous accusation that I'd challenge you to prove.  
Senator ROBERTS:   It's a question. It's on the registry for Abelshore.  
Senator Watt:   But you're alleging that the ALP has engaged in some sort of nefarious, illegal activity 
involving the diversion of donations from unions to companies —seriously! You've got to at least present a bit of 
evidence to back up those sorts of claims.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I asked you a simple question about a fact on the registry. You are getting upset about 
that. That's on the registry.  
Senator Watt:   You've gone a bit further than that.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 85 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   No. I've asked the question: are you aware of Abelshore, which is 100 per cent owned 
by Glencore, giving money to the CFMEU?  
Senator Watt:   Never heard of it.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. You answered that.  
Senator Watt:   I have never heard of it, unless you've said it repeatedly in other estimates hearings.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I haven't.  
Senator Watt:   Which is quite possible.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I haven't. The second question I asked you was: are you aware that the Labor Party 
receives some money from the CFMEU?  
Senator Watt:   Yes. We were just talking about that, although I think that might be a different division of the 
CFMEU. You are talking about the Mining and Energy Union, I presume.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm talking about the CFMEU. That's all that's on the registry. I do know the CFMEU — 
Senator Watt:   I don't know anything about it.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I do know that the CFMEU makes donations to the Labor Party. You've already 
admitted that.  
Senator Watt:   I know that , and I know that your party and the coalition resent that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   My question was: are you aware in any way as to whether or not any of Abelshore's or 
Glencore's money went through the CFMEU to the Labor Party? That's all I am asking.  
Senator Watt:   I am not aware of that. You are suggesting some sort of illegal activity , and I would challenge 
you.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I am asking you a question, Minister.  
Senator Watt:   I am not aware of that. If you have any evidence to support that, then you should be referring it 
to the authorities for it to be investigated.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thanks, Minister. As I said, it's on the registry. You're a lawyer ; you know what that 
means.  
Senator Watt:   I don't think there is anything about some conspiracy with respect to donations on the registry. 
That's your creation.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Conspiracy is a label that is used to denigrate people. Minister, I don't know why you 
need to use a label.  
Senator Watt:   I think it's a pretty fitting label.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts, I 'll rotate the call to Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, ultimately the fair work framework, as we've discovered here, allows 
someone like Mr Margjini to gain a right of entry permit. You don't seem to see any problem here. I'm asking you 
whether or not you see an issue that could be resolved.  
Senator Watt:   I can't add anything to what I have already said.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So you don't see a problem?  
Senator Watt:   I can't add anything to what I've already said.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's what I've got from what you're saying.  
Senator Watt:   You can interpret what I say. It doesn't really matter what I say because you are going to 
interpret it in a way that you want to interpret it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Now is the chance for you to just clarify.  
Senator Watt:   I can't add anything to what I have already said.  
CHAIR:   We now release workplace relations, outcome 3, and go to outcome 1. Thank you for your day. We 
will suspend for a moment whilst we change over.  
Proceedings suspended from 17:32 to 17:37  
CHAIR:   We now have outcome 1 , Employment. I think there is a short statement. Ms James.  
Ms James:   Chair, with indulgence, I just wanted to let you know something about the Pacific Australia 
Labour Mobility scheme, which I am sure we will get to at some point in the course of these proceedings. You 
might recall from previous discussions about the PALM scheme, as we refer to it, that its domestic operations Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 86 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  were insourced from a private provider at the end of 2023. This enabled us to strengthen oversight of the domestic 
operations and implement a new delivery model.  Shortly after the insourcing process was finalised —it was a 
complex process —we became concerned about the PALM worker numbers and how they were being calculated. 
In response to this, we commenced a data -quality review of the PALM scheme worker data. We carried this out 
with the assistance of the department's chief data officer. This review identified a number of factors that were 
contributing to incorrect calculation of worker data.  
What this means, unfortunately, is that today we're constrained in providing you with historical PALM worker 
data. I am sure we will be asked, but we can and will provide current aggregate scheme data for the month of 
March. We have done enough work to have confidence in that data. I should also say that data on the number of 
PALM  approved employers and visa numbers provided by the Department of Home Affairs is not impacted by 
this. I would like to assure the committee that data we previously reported was based on information provided by 
this originally outsourced provider that we had relied on.  
We know how important PALM is to our stakeholders and how important it is to be transparent and have 
reliable data. We have established a new methodology to calculate worker numbers. We've commenced a process 
of recalculation. This is specialised work. We want to make sure that we have confidence in data going forward. 
We had hoped that it would be done by now, hence my providing you with this information from the outset. I 
want to emphasise that we stand by our previous commitment that we made to publish monthly worker data on 
data.gov.au on the department's website once this recalculation is finalised and we're confident that the data we 
are providing is indeed accurate data.  
Officers are here who can provide you with more background on that. I just wanted to be up -front with you 
because I was fairly certain that we would come to questions about PALM worker numbers, and I didn't want to 
surprise you in the context of back and forth at that point. I just wanted to let you know where we are at with that.  
Senator CASH:   Are you tabling that statement?  
Ms James:   No. I have varied from the notes that I have read from a little. I am happy to answer any questions.  
CHAIR:   Thanks, Ms James. I am sure there will be some questions raised during the hearing. Thank you for 
the heads -up. We will contemplate and think about what you have just reported to us. Thanks for that. Senator 
Cox.  
Senator COX:   Can I ask some questions about the Closing the Gap target with respect to the Remote Jobs 
Economic Development program .  
Ms Rishniw:   The remote jobs program itself is a program that's run out of the National Indigenous 
Australians Agency. Those questions should be referred to that agency.  
Senator COX:   What is the involvement of your department then?  
Ms Rishniw:   We work with the NIAA in terms of broader employment reforms and making sure that we've 
got a coherent and cohesive system across the board. We're a member on the interdepartmental committee, but it's 
very much driven from NIAA.  
Senator COX:   I will be asking across -portfolio questions of the NIAA on Friday. My concern is that a 
considerable amount of money is being prioritised by this government, namely, $777.4 million over the next five 
years and also the forward estimate of that at $255.5 million. It's never going to remain just in Indigenous affairs 
forever. Mainstreaming Closing the Gap is everyone's responsibility. So I ask: what is your department doing to 
close the gap for Indigenous employment?  
Ms Rishniw:   Let me answer more broadly. The specific remote employment program sits with the National 
Indigenous Australians Agency more broadly. Obviously, we have a range of First Nations people who are 
receiving services through Workforce Australia. We are responsible for two of the targets in terms of Closing the 
Gap.  
Senator COX:   Which targets are they?  
Ms Rishniw:   Target 7 and target 8. Let me just go to the specifics of those targets in particular.  
Senator COX:   You are referring to target 8 —namely, that by 2031 to increase the proportion of Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander people aged 25 to 64 who are employed to 62 per cent?  
Ms Rishniw:   That's right.  
Senator COX:   What is the responsibility of your department in relation to that?  
Ms Rishniw:   In terms of that, we work with the National Indigenous Australians Agency. From a broader 
Workforce Australia perspective, we look at how we service First Nations Australians through mainstream Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 87 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  programs  and how do we work with employers to make sure that First Nations Australians are well placed to take 
up the jobs and the opportunities that they want. National Indigenous Australians Agency particularly focuses on 
remote areas. As I said, we are responsible for the overall target but working together with NIAA.  
Senator COX:   Is there an overlay of remote work that your department does?  
Ms Rishniw:   In terms of remote jobs —you will remember the old boundaries of CDP, which still exist while 
the new program is being rolled out —we provide services through Workforce Australia outside of those 
boundaries, but we make sure that we've got good connections to the NIAA at service provision.  There are other 
particular areas on which we are really focusing. We have a range of specialist providers that focus on 
Indigenous -specific specialist programs. We have a new prison -to-work program specifically focused on First 
Nations people. We look at wage subsidies so that, if they are in our program, First Nations Australians get access 
to a wage subsidy from day one. 
Senator COX:   Is there a figure attached to that?  
Ms Rishniw:   We will take it on notice and get that figure to you.  
Senator COX:   That would be great. Are you doing anything in relation to target 7?  
Ms Rishniw:   The youth participation target is a joint target with the Department of Education, together with 
the skills element of our portfolio. It is about attainment. The skills part of the portfolio is probably best placed to 
answer that. That is a target where we are currently not on track but we're working towards making sure that we 
have young First Nations people in tertiary education, whether it be through higher education or through skills, 
and making sure we have that year 12 attainment and flowthrough into employment.  
Senator COX:   Given that we are not on track, what are we not doing right?  
Ms Rishniw:   That is a broad question. I should defer to the Department of Education in terms of the broader 
responsibility. We are working hard in partnership across government with First Nations Australians. We are 
working hard to listen and respond to the relevant issues, and to make sure we have the right partnership approach 
under the National Agreement on Closing the Gap. We are making sure we have the right data and we are 
supporting First Nations organisations —particularly community  controlled organisations —to take the lead in 
service delivery and work with government around that.  
Senator COX:   Does that include your funding allocations being matched to the four priority reform areas of 
the CGA?  
Ms Rishniw:   It doesn't translate directly to matching funding, but if you look at the funding that was recently 
announced —particularly around the work we are doing supporting the National Indigenous Employment and 
Training Alliance to take a lead around the new prison -to-work program and, more broadly, as a peak 
organisation for First Nations employment service providers —you will see that there is a commitment from 
government to fund direct delivery by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations; that's an example.  
Senator COX:   Is that part of the procurement policy —to make sure that the four priority reforms translate 
directly into the funding allocations, or are we just putting that out there?  
Ms James:   We are. You asked what we are doing wrong. A not bad assessment of that is the Productivity 
Commission's report into the implementation by governments —that is, all governments —of the Closing the Gap 
Agreement. Of the priority reforms you mentioned, working in partnership and shared decision -making, and 
building the community -controlled sector, are two that we have been working on. Ms Rishniw mentioned the 
National Indigenous Employment and Training Alliance, which is a brand new peak. We didn't have a First 
Nations peak organisation until recently. We have worked with the people who formed that organisation to assist 
with its establishment.  
You mentioned procurement. As we know, the procurement world can operate in a very commercial way. We 
are working to ensure that the procurement process within this department —the department formed on 1 July, 
2022 —supports Aboriginal  controlled organisations. For example, we have our new parenting program out at the 
moment; I need to be careful commenting on that because it is out for procurement. We have done a lot of work 
there to ensure that the First Nations cohort which is likely to be eligible for that program will be supported by 
First Nations providers and other providers who have the cultural competency to work with those parents.  
Senator COX:   The real cause of unemployment in this country is structural change; it is not behavioural 
change, so we need the structures in place. That's why I asked the question about procurement. You can still 
operate within a commercial context, but unless we provide the structure we are not going to get any change. It 
has already been reported that closing the gap on First Nations employment in this country will take 100 years. Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 88 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  None of us have the time to be sitting around waiting for structural reform to fall in place so that we can get on 
with achieving this target by 2031.  
Ms Rishniw:   We have a target of 2031. We are working hard to address a range of things. The secretary 
outlined the procurement pieces around, for example, the parenting program, the support we are providing to 
establish and support a peak body to drive vibrant commercial businesses and the work we do more broadly in 
procurement looking at the minority supply procurement arrangements and working with Finance around those, 
as well.  
Senator COX:   Are you having any input into the Remote Jobs and Economic Development program ?  
Ms Rishniw:   We sit on the IDC, the interdepartmental committee, so we work on the Remote Jobs and 
Economic Development program that is run by NIAA, and a range of other agencies across the board. I have met 
with the First Nations reference group a number of times, looking at how to make sure we have a coherent and 
consistent employment services system.  
Senator COX:   Are they separate from the national employment and training alliance, or are they a different 
advisory group?  
Ms Rishniw:   They are. The National Indigenous Employment and Training Alliance is a peak body for 
employment services that are run by First Nations. The chair of that organisation, Matthew Clarke, is also a co -
chair of the First Nations reference group that is advising Minister Burney.  
Senator COX:   On notice, can you provide information on who is on the reference group that you are seeking 
advice from?  
Ms Rishniw:   We will need to put that to the National Indigenous Australians Agency. It is a First Nations 
Reference Group set up by Minister Burney to advise on the remote jobs piece.  
Senator COX:   Thanks for clarifying that. I will ask that question on Friday.  
Senator DAVEY:   I have questions about the PALM scheme, since you brought it up first thing, Ms James.  
Ms James:   It is good to be getting to it in daylight hours.  
Senator DAVEY:   Before I get to questions about numbers, I take on board what you said in your statement. 
Minister, last week your government announced a wonderful backflip on the 30 -hour minimum hour week 
requirement that had been in place. That change is to take place from 1 July. Approved employers will now be 
able to offer 120 hours averaged over four weeks. What led to the backflip?  
Senator Watt:   It might surprise some people to hear this, but the government does listen. Our view was that 
we should take a bit longer to see how these changes were panning out. We believed that the position that was 
arrived at was the right one, at least for the next 12 months. I am not sure how across the detail of it you are, 
Senator. It is not simply a reversal of what had been announced before. I can get the officials to take you through 
it in detail. On 1 January we moved to a situation where approved employers needed to pay a minimum or an 
average of at least 30 hours a week over a four -week period. My understanding is that there were no real 
consequences if that didn't happen. Some agriculture groups put on the table a suggestion that we have some 
stronger enforcement of that arrangement so that people would have to be paid an average of 30 hours a week 
over a four -week period. We have made clear that anyone who breaches that will go to the minimum 30 hours a 
week each and every week.  
Senator DAVEY:   Industry raised concerns from the outset about the 30 -hour week model; we were quite 
vocal about it. How much consultation did the government do prior to introducing the 30 -hour week model? Why 
didn't you listen to the concerns being raised at the time?  
Senator Watt:   I can get the officials to take you through the consultation that occurred at the beginning. It 
was extensive. You will remember, as we have talked about this at previous estimates hearings, that the 
government was concerned that we were seeing too many examples of the abuse of the PALM scheme by rogue 
employers. People were being brought to Australia having been promised lots of work, only to not get that work 
and go into debt to their employer, rather than sending money back home, which is the intent of the scheme. 
That's why we took action. There were concerns amongst specific countries about people experiencing 
exploitation under that scheme. We thought we had to stop that. We can get the officials to take you through the 
consultation.  
Senator DAVEY:   I will come back to the officials; I will be asking them about consultation. Minister, are you 
aware of what consultation the minister had with stakeholders and industry groups both prior to bringing in the 
30-hour week but also when we made this decision to revert to a 120 -hour rolling average?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 89 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   I couldn't speak to the consultation Minister Burke has had. Some of the officials might know; 
otherwise , I could take it on notice.  
Senator DAVEY:   I would appreciate it if you could.  
Senator Watt:   As the agriculture minister, I have spoken extensively about the issue with both farm employer 
groups and trade unions representing the workers. I am confident that Minister Burke had some discussions. I 
couldn't tell you exactly which ones and with whom.  
Senator DAVEY:   There were a lot of anecdotal stories about the change leading to some approved employers 
leaving the scheme. Last time I asked about it, some had left and some had come on. I will be asking the 
department for numbers. Minister, are you confident that this change will satisfy the employers who had 
concerns, and who might bring some who may have left the scheme back onto the scheme?  
Senator Watt:   That is the advice of those farm employer groups. I know that, for example, the Australian 
Fresh Produce Alliance, which represents some of the major horticulture producers, welcomed this change, and 
suggested this change. They played a very constructive role with the government in putting forward some options. 
I congratulate them for the constructive role they played. The National Farmers Federation put out a press release 
last week welcoming these changes. I think you were at agriculture estimates hearings, Senator . Around the time 
National Party senators were suggesting that we couldn't work with the National Farmers Federation, they put out 
two press releases on the same day commending the government.  
Senator DAVEY:   Indeed, Minister Michael McCormack also put out a press release welcoming the change.  
Senator Watt:   Did he? I missed that. He's a good fellow. There should be more like him.  
Senator DAVEY:   Sometimes, when you listen to stakeholders, people are rewarding you.  
Senator Watt:   On the broader question about what impact it has had on the number of employers, again, the 
officials could give you the numbers. My understanding is that the number of approved employers, the number of 
employers who use the scheme, has increased since we made the first changes. I was told today that's still the 
case. The officials might know the details better than me.  
Ms Rishniw:   Mr Stott will walk you through the consultation. As the minister has outlined, there was 
significant consultation with heads of mission, with different Pacific countries and with employer groups 
throughout. We can walk you through that. We have answered some of those questions on notice previously. The 
number of approved employers has gone from 424, at the end of June 2023, to 473, as at 31 March this year.  
Senator DAVEY:   With regard to this most recent change —because there are a lot —while it is generally 
welcomed across the board, there are still some questions. I understand that this change has come about because 
of concerns about not enforcing the 30 -hour week. As you said, Minister, there wasn't that follow -through. With 
this change there will be more increased watching and reporting obligations.  
Senator Watt:   In making the change that we made on 1 January, which was to move to an average of 30 
hours a week, averaged over four weeks, to be frank, I always thought that there would be consequences for 
employers who didn't comply with that. It turns out that was not the case. What we've done —and officials can 
correct me at any point if I get any of this wrong —is ensure that there will now be consequences for an employer 
who agrees to pay someone an average of 30 hours over a four -week period but doesn't. If they don't do that, they 
will go to the arrangement where you have to pay 30 hours a week each and every week; whereas, before, there 
was no consequence if someone didn't do that.  
Senator DAVEY:   Have we got data on what proportion of approved employers were paying people for less 
than the 30 hours during those periods?  
Mr Stott:   We have a little stack of things coming up, so perhaps we can resolve some of those. The matters 
related to consultation. We went through those together in the last two estimates. They are also matters that we 
have taken on notice. If it helps with time, they are recorded in answers to questions on notice. We have Ms Duffy 
here, who can take us through in detail. We would be traversing previously covered ground.  To do that really 
quickly: it starts in November 2021 and moves through to February of the year prior to the release of the deed and 
guidelines, when we did more specific consultations, through to the months and weeks leading up to the release of 
the new deed and guidelines. That's a penny tour of the consultation, but that question was taken on notice and 
those answers have been published. The question about the minister's engagement was also asked on notice, and 
that's been published. I note that's been taken on notice again.  
Ms Rishniw gave you correct figures. Very few employers have left the scheme. There are now more 
employers who are active in the scheme than were active prior to the recent deed and guidelines. There are more 
approved employers overall. They are still growing.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 90 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  We've come now to the new settings, or the continuation of the four -week period for reconciliation of workers 
hours. The quick way to summarise that would to be say that the change is that the previous settings were 
described as averaging over a four -week period. We were monitoring, looking at employers to ensure that they 
provided 120 hours over that four -week reconciliation period. That was described as on average. I suppose what 
that meant was that the hours by week would broadly average out so that at the conclusion of the settlement 
period they equalled 120.  
What will continue, as of 1 July this year through to July next year, is 120 hours but with what we have 
described as an income guarantee. That is a suggestion that I heard referred to as coming from the Australian 
Fresh Produce Alliance: that employers would guarantee 120 hours over that four -week reconciliation period.  
What's been offered in addition to that is a compliance mechanism, where, if there is noncompliance, a new 
condition could be applied to an employer, subject to undertaking the usual compliance arrangements. That, of 
course, is done in compliance with our regulatory framework. That would require natural justice, due process, and 
proper and appropriate assessment.  
If noncompliance was found at the conclusion, we would apply a condition to that specific employer, but they 
would continue to participate in the scheme. This is a new condition. We have never had a condition offered like 
that before. They would be able to continue in the scheme but would be required to provide the relevant 
employees, their PALM employees, with no fewer than 30 hours per week, every week, to incentivise that 
compliance.  
Senator DAVEY:   Thank you. I am getting my head around it. The penalty for an employer who doesn't pay 
the full 120 hours in a four -week period is to then go onto a compliance process where the condition for continual 
participation in the scheme is that they revert to having to pay 30 hours per week, every week.  
Mr Stott:   We are reluctant to get into a detailed conversation about the compliance framework; it would allow 
people to understand in too much detail how we undertake those activities. Very briefly put, yes, the new 
condition would be that if a person was found to be noncompliant and it was appropriate and proportionate to do 
so, we would apply a condition on that person, rather than exiting them.  Under previous conditions, we wouldn't 
have a condition like this. That person, for noncompliance, may ultimately be exited from the scheme. This is a 
way of keeping them within the scheme and keeping those employees from having to be redeployed. To keep the 
workforce available for that particular approved employer, the condition would be placed upon them that requires 
30 hours per week, every week.  
Senator DAVEY:   If an employee was underutilised, would one of the ways that an employer could resolve 
that be to pay the full 120?  
Mr Stott:   Yes. The way the setting would work, I suppose, is where you are going to. If, for example, an 
employer made available to a given worker 110 hours over that settlement period, they would make up the 10 
hours in paying that worker.  
Senator DAVEY:   Does that have to be paid at the employer's standard rate of pay? If the award is below the 
employer's hourly rate of pay, can they say, 'We will give you the extra 10 hours but at award rates'?  
Mr Stott:   We would need to avoid specificity and blurring the boundaries. The typical rate of pay for the 
worker in those circumstances would be the way to generalise that.  
Senator DAVEY:   Do you have data, from 1 January 2020 up until the original changes were brought in, on 
what proportion of approved employers were paying for fewer than 30 hours a week?  
Mr Stott:   We have answered that on notice as well. There is very little data. The data doesn't exist in a way 
that is really easy to answer that question, purely because individual workers didn't previously exist as a unit in 
our system —you have to forgive me for talking about a person as a 'unit' —in order for us to be able to track them. 
Something that is new in the system is their capacity to do that. It is immature; it is brand new, as the secretary 
outlined in her opening remarks.  
Senator DAVEY:   I am prepared for you to say : 'This is what Ms James was talking about. We haven't got it.' 
I am asking because you said you had approved employer and visa numbers, but this is why the participant 
numbers might be not quite collated.  
Mr Stott:   We very much understand how important the scheme is to people and how important information 
about the scheme is. With respect to people's pay being delivered to them, there are proxies for that. They exist in 
publicly available information. The ANU released some information on its development policy blog a few months 
ago. There have been other sources similar to that over the years. It demonstrated that, in many instances, many 
workers received what we would expect, 30 hours or greater, and in some instances they did not.  We have come Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 91 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  to understand that workers who don't have a positive experience in the workplace, including those who aren't paid 
sufficiently to support themselves and their families and to pay off deductions that come out for their travel and 
other costs, are more likely to disengage from the program. Optimally, the converse of that is equally true. Those 
who do have a satisfactory experience of work and do receive good hours are those who are more likely to be the 
reliable and productive PALM workers that we all value.  
Senator DAVEY:   Because you don't have the data about the individual participants, do you have the data 
about how many approved employers were in breach of the requirement to offer mandated hours?  
Mr Stott:   What we have is data about those who were breached. I don't know if we can be so specific. If we 
were overly specific, we would be at risk of identifying people who are in the midst of investigation processes or 
who have resolved them. I can get Ms Rowe to go through some of that compliance data. Is that helpful to you 
now?  
Senator DAVEY:   Yes. You can give me those that were breached, just so that we can get an understanding of 
how big or small the issue may be.  
Ms Rowe:   In response to your question about how many breaches —this is since the new deed came into 
place, to 31 March —there were 10 breach notices issued to approved employers. I can't give you a number in 
relation to your question on how many of those related to hours specifically, but I can give you a general 
summary of the types of things that those breaches constituted.  
Senator DAVEY:   What was the period for that?  
Ms Rowe:   It was from 1 July 2023 to 31 March 2024. I can't give you a specific number in relation to those 
that relate to hours, but what I can give you is a general summary of the types of things that those 10 breaches 
constituted. The types of things that they constituted were things like nonpayment of superannuation, or 
inappropriate deductions. There was a breach to do with internal governance not aligning with our contractual 
requirements. There were some breaches to do with accommodation in the deed, and the accommodation not 
matching the requirements of our deed, and to do with reporting of incidents not being in line with our deed.  
Senator DAVEY:   You didn't read out hours, or is it hours as well?  
Ms Rowe:   No; we haven't had a breach notice issued with respect to hours. We do have investigations 
underway with respect to matters relating to hours. We do assurance activities. Our approach generally to 
assurance of the scheme is educative. We work closely with employers to educate them on the requirements, 
particularly given that we have a new deed and guidelines, and it's new to all the employers who participate in the 
scheme.  We focus very much on the meaning and requirements of the deed and the guidelines. We then do 
assurance activities, where we will do a sample of whether approved employers are meeting obligations under 
that deed. Those activities will potentially pick up issues that we will then investigate, if we identify an issue. 
Yes, we have some investigations underway in relation to hours, but I can't give you an exact number. I only have 
aggregate numbers.  
Senator Watt:   Also , an employer could only get a breach notice for not paying the minimum of 30 hours over 
a four -week period from 1 January, which is when th at change came into force , and  those figures were up to 31 
March.  
Mr Stott :  Just for clarity , we have a process where we undertake an assessment  at about the four-month mark , 
and w e look at  pay and conditions. The first one of those was in April , so i t's early days.  
Senator DAVEY:   You would n't have the data yet —not through not lo oking, but just because it 's not within 
the reporting period.  
Mr Stott :  Yes, and, like Ms Rowe articulate s, we have a regulatory frame . You could expect that we  would be 
appropriate , proportionate  and educative . As we look at four -monthly  outcomes  and as we look at  pays and 
salaries , if we were to  identif y issues and they could be corrected, they would be corrected . In those instances , it 
would be unlikely that a breach would occur.  
Ms Rowe :  We have a hotline where workers can report issues. We have staff who go out in the field and meet 
with workers to check on their welfare and wellbeing. The education goes to workers understanding what the ir 
entitlements are , so y ou would expect that we'd have some reporting of approved employers not meeting those 
obligations , if workers were to report those types of things , but we have n't been receiving those types of 
allegations.  
Senator DAVEY:   The minister mentioned , quite rightly , that a lot of participants in the PALM scheme,  a lot 
of employees that come over , do so in the hopes of being able to send money home . I know that that is greatly Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 92 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  appreciated by their home nations. Do we track the success or otherwise  of the remittance that people might be 
sending home ? Do we keep any data in that sense?  
Mr Stott :  There has been World Bank research on that. It 's probably best that I go to  Ms Rowe again on that . 
We might need to take it on notice. There was research done in 2018 , but it was recently updated , and I don't 
know that I have it with me today.  
Ms Rowe :  I should say : what people do with their salary and wages with their families is obviously a matter 
of privacy for them , so the research would be at a broader  level . 
Senator DAVEY:   A higher level, and no t identifiable, absolutely.  
Ms Rowe :  Yes. 
Senator DAVEY:   I'm more than happy for you to take that on notice , if you c ould provide us with the 
updated research . It would be very interesting. I have j ust one more question and then I 'm happy to hand over. We 
know that , from a soft diplomacy perspective , this scheme has been quite warmly welcomed. Has there been any 
feedback from the home nations of concerns about potential declines in participants ' hours  or in remittance 
coming home?  
Ms Rishniw:   I'll start , and  then Mr S tott can fill in. Overall, what we 're seeing continues to be a strong 
engagement from Pacific island nations . They see  this program as beneficial for their home nation , and, 
domestically , our employers  see it  as a good source of labour , particularly in areas where we have labour 
shortages. We do n't see any signals or any data that suggest there is less interest . In fact, what we're seeing is 
more interest from different Pacific island nations to participate in the scheme. We regularly meet with heads of 
mission , and DFAT , who are  obviously responsible for the policy, meet with nations in their embassies and 
postings around the Pacific. What we see is really good engagement, strong engagement. We have a good 
working relationship with all of those heads of mission to articulate any issues or concerns emerging and address 
them quickly and in a way that is beneficial both to them and to Australia's national interest. It think it' s fair to say 
that, from  the engagement that we've had with those heads of mission, even in the last year, they have welcomed 
the government 's insourcing o f the program and have seen a marked improvement in their ability to have 
assurance that workers are protected and the scheme is working as intended.  
Mr Stott :  I think that 's a good answer ! 
Senator Watt:   If you wanted to get into the dealings between Pacific nations and our government about the 
scheme, it would probably be worth raising that at the DFAT estimates as well.  
Senator DAVEY:   Yes. 
CHAIR:   Senator Allman -Payne . 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I've been looking at the Workforce Australia services provider performance 
ratings for March 2024 . Service providers are rated as high, moderate or low , and, according to th e March 2024 
overall ratings, approximately 38 .6 per cent of providers got a low rating overall. I 'm interested to know what the 
department's view is on that.  
Ms Rishniw:   We have a robust performance framework for Workforce Australia. It has a range of different 
measures and components to it that go to assessing providers across a range of performance indicators. As 
indicators are refined or change d sometimes , a provider who may have previously been ranked as high may 
readjust as we introduce different measures and different performance indicators. I 'll ask Mr Bea sley to explain 
how we look at performance. We obviously work closely with providers to make sure that we lift performance 
across the board.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I guess my concern is that 38 per cent —that's over a third—are not meeting the 
department's expectations at all. Is that acceptable?  
Mr Beasley :  It might help if I  run you through some of the re asons that those low ratings are there , just  to 
provide — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Could you m ake it reasonably brief . I'm conscious of the fact that I don't have a 
lot of time before the break.  
Mr Beasley :  Not a worry. The provider performance framework has five modules overall.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Actually, is it possible to provide that  on notice?  
Mr Beasley :  We can provide that on notice  for you.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 93 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   That would be great . That means I can work through the rest of my questions in 
the short amount of time that I have.  How many failures or low ratings does a provider have to receive before they  
lose a contract? In other words, what 's the acceptable level of failure?  
Mr Beasley :  Where a provider receives a low rating , we work with them intensively to improve that rating. 
That will be through our state network and our provide r lead network.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   So where do you draw the line?  
Mr Beasley :  Workforce Australia has a licen ce review process. As we undertake th at process , we will look in 
particular at low -performing providers , and, where they have n't improve d their performance , they'll be  exited 
from the system.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   So you have discontinued providers , based on low ratings?  
Mr Beasley :  As Workforce Australia started in mid -2022, that licence review process is yet to be undertaken. 
We're expecting to announce the timing around that soon.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   So at this point in time there are no instances where someone has been 
discontinued as a provider because of low ratings?  
Mr Beasley :  No, because the contracts are scheduled to end in the middle of next year , but there has been — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I'm n ot talking about contracts  ending , though. If someone is performing so 
badly —if you 're a person  on income support and you miss one appointment , your money gets cut off , and yet we 
have providers, 38 per cent of whom are not performing, and I'm hearing , 'We just work with them. ' 
Ms James :  Senator, I think we would say that the performance is n't where we 'd like it to be —we would agree 
with you —but I would note that this is a relatively new system and it 's quite different from the old one. There are 
a lot of new providers in th is syste m. We're in the first phase of a new system . I would certainly like to see the 
performance lifted. I would like to see better outcomes, particularly for the more vulnerable cohorts. We also have 
work going on in response to a parliamentary inquiry into the employment services system,  and that's  going on in 
parallel to overseeing this new system. The department does take very seriously the performance of providers . We 
need to get the balance right between giving new providers the opportunity to adjust to a new system and 
perform —some of the m are  providers that were n't in the old system , and s ome of them are brand  new providers —
and ensuring that , if they 're not able to lift performance , they do n't remain in the system.  I appreciate that it might 
feel slow. It's important that we comply with the terms of  the contracts and that we're fair , but we certainly work 
with providers very intensively when the performance is n't what we would like it to be.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   A significant concern for me  is that we have people on income support  and 
people on disability support pensions  that are  required to meet mutual obligations requirements. They are amongst 
the most vulnerable people in our community. They virtually have a n o-strikes -and-you're-out policy appl ied to 
them , and yet you 're telling me that this system is going to take a while to get providers up to scratch and the like. 
Maybe this is a question for the minister . Should we be continu ing with mutual obligations whil st this needs to be 
fixed and whilst providers need to be brought up to standard? The most vulnerable people in the community are 
the one's who are suffering the results of the se service providers not meeting the standard.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, and t hat is one of the reasons why the government is making a range of changes to the 
employment services regime. Obviously, there has been an inquiry into it. This year's budget delivered some 
initial steps towards reform. We know that there 's more to be done , and we also know that the employment 
services system as it currently works is n't satisfactor y. 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   My question is: i f you know that, would n't it be better to suspend something 
like mutual obligation so that the most vulnerable people in our community are not suffering the results of this 
poor performance while you fix it?  
Senator Watt:   No, no. One a rea of  policy difference between the  government and the Greens party is around 
mutual obligation. We have always  said that we do support th e concept  of mutual obligation . 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I'm not asking you if you don't support mutual obligations . You've just said 
there 's a problem , and  we know there 's a problem , but is the government happy that , while there's a problem , the 
people who are experiencing the brunt of that problem just have to suck it up until it 's fixed?  
Senator Watt:   Well,  I would n't put it that way , but what I'm saying to you is that our government does 
support the concept of mutual obligation , and it will continue to apply while we make the reforms that are 
necessary.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Okay. At least that 's clear for all those people who are trapped in a system that 
is currently not working.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 94 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   Yes, and the only way that it's going to change for them is having a Labor government that 
fixes the employment services program s. 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I'm sure they take great comfort.  
Senator Watt:   I would hope they do, because they have had complaints for a long  time.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I understand that someone from the department —I think it might have been in 
an interview with the Guardian , and it reflects what you 've told me —said that the department works closely with 
those who  have received a low rating , and they get a performance plan. What specific performance improvement 
treatments are being put in place to address the failure of service?  
Mr Beasley :  I'd probably defer to the state office in terms of things that we're doing around specific 
treatments , but one point I  would make is that it 's not just between education and exit ; it's also the case that we 
have other remedial action that we take. For example , we have 37 matters currently under investigation , related to 
a range of issues around the employment fund , the participation  fund and the quality of servicing . From that we 
will do things like recover payments , decrease the number of participants referred to providers and so on , so there 
is a compliance triangle that sits between education and exit.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   And there's a metric for improvements?  
Mr Beasley :  In terms of improvement s and metrics, that is the provider performance framework itself , so 
the— 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   That's what you're going to provide us on notice.  
Mr Beasley :  metric for improvement  will be m oving from low through to high.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Chair,  I'm not finished , but I do note it's 6.30. Can I move to my next block 
after the break?  
CHAIR:   That's fine. We'll now suspend.  
Proceedings suspended from 18:30 to 19:19  
CHAIR:   We will now resume. Senator Colbeck?  
Senator COLBECK:   I just want to go back to the PALM scheme for a moment. I'm not sure whether this was 
asked when I was out of the room before, but was the uncertainty in numbers that you talked about in your 
opening statement above or below where the numbers are reported , or is it all over the shop?  
Ms James :  I'll ask Mr Stott to talk you through what we found. As I said, when we got hold of all the data and 
the system s, something did n't look quite right . That i s often the case with data . It can take a while to work out 
what it is that's awry . But the team are now  recalculating , so I think they can explain that to you.  
Senator COLBECK:   Trust me, I understand how it can  take time to get data. Senator Watt does, too.  
Senator Watt:   Are you h aving f lashbacks to  the community affairs committee?  
Mr Stott :  The month for which we 've got data prepared , we did n't previously have data available for or 
reported against. So it 's difficult to say with certainty whether or not the correct numbers that we have for the 
month of March, which was 32,880 workers in the country —given that we didn 't have a comparative dataset  for 
that same month , we can simply say that we know the data for the month of March.  
Senator COLBECK:   But you don't know whether the other data that you 're not certain about and that you 're 
going about proof testing is under or over ; you just know that it's not right?  
Mr Stott :  In very broad terms, yes.  
Senator COLBECK:   Do you think it 's under?  
Mr Stott :  We previously reported publicly the data for February . I don't have that with me. Do you have that, 
Ms Rowe?  
Ms Rowe :  I don't have it with me.  
Senator COLBECK:   Do you think it 's short or  do you think it's  over?  
Mr Stott :  The number of workers in country that's reported is lower than the number that was previously  
reported . It was much higher —in the 30,000s. Apologies; I have n't got the data with me. It's publicly available.  
Ms Rowe :  It's in the vicinity of about a 5,000 -worker drop, but it's very difficult to pinpoint an exact number , 
because, through the review of data, we found some different issues in the data. There were duplicate records , and 
some workers were exited when they shouldn't have been exited or not exited where they should have been. Some Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 95 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  of them might have been caught up in different cohorts of data issues. Therefore, it was difficult to give an exact 
figure . But it's i n the vicinity of about 5 ,000. 
Mr Stott :  In very broad terms, there were a  number of workers previously reported who weren't actually here ; 
the calculation method wasn't correct. We've corrected that methodology and are proceeding with the numbers 
from March . It's very specialised and detailed work , but we need to work retrospectively on the numbers that have 
previously been reported and correct those.  
Senator COLBECK:   I could  make a comment here , but I'm just not going to go to it. I don't want to spend 
too much time on this because I want to go to something else.  
Senator Watt:   Can I add one thing, Senator Colbeck . This is  something that 's come to light quite recently . 
The department is still working through it. I'm obviously not the minister , but I know about it given the impact on 
ag. As I understand it, we' re not talking about there being  a drop of 5 ,000 from one month to the next month . It's 
more likely that , over a number of years , the number of PALM workers hasn 't been quite as high as has been 
publicly reported , both before and after the election.  
Senator COLBECK:   That basically what I was trying to get to.  
Senator Watt:   Is that accurate?  
Mr Stott :  That's correct, yes.  
Senator COLBECK:   So the numbers are lower than what we thought  before.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, r ather than there being a big drop from one month to another month . 
Senator COLBECK:   That clears that up  for me . Thanks . I want to go to accommodation . 
Senator Watt:   For PALM workers?  
Senator COLBECK:   Yes. In February last year there was an occurrence on the north -west coast of Tas sie in 
a place called Shearwater , in the Latrobe municipality , where the council found 40 workers in a property . One 
room had 18 workers in it. That room also had a matrix of power boards and whatever. Those power boards 
served rice cookers and cooking devices in the bedrooms. I'm happy to table the document that I'm referring to 
here. When the department was contacted about what was term ed 'di sgusting ' accommodation for seasonal 
workers at this  Shearwater  house, the department distance d itself from it because it was deemed that the workers 
had arranged their own  accommodation.  
They com e here under a scheme, so most things are arranged for them. My concern is that this is the second 
time this particular operator has done the same thing. They're a serial offender  with bloody poor behaviour. 
TASCAT, the Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, found a couple of weeks ago against the owner, who 
still think s they've done nothing wrong ; they'll do it again. How do we keep individuals like this out of the 
business? Eighteen people to a room — 
Senator Watt:   It's outrageous.  
Senator COLBECK:   It is outrageous. I saw the thing on the hostel in Queensland on telly the other week, 
where the backpackers fire was.  
Senator Watt:   I think it was Bundaberg.  
Senator COLBECK:   I don't want one of them on my doorstep. These are really important workers for my 
community, for my ag community. How do I keep these people out of business?  
Mr Stott :  The accommodation is not approved accommodation, so it's not part of, if you like, an approved 
provider.  
Senator COLBECK:   That's what you said at the time. But t hey're still there ; they're still in the game.  
Mr Stott :  There is a capacity — 
Senator COLBECK:   I'll give you the next piece . The director of the business, Mr B aldock ; his lawyer , Mr 
Glynn Williams ; his wife, Claudia Baldock —who's a Latrobe councillor —and his business manager , Mr James 
Redgrave, are all saying: 'There's nothing to see here. There's not a problem. We'll do it again.' Because it's not an 
approved site under the scheme , its hands off from the scheme. That's the way that it reads to me. This happened a 
year ago. We don't want these people in the business.  
Mr Stott :  Not unlike the scenario we mentioned earlier where  tracking where people spend their money is an 
intrusion on people's privacy and rights, so too is requiring them in detail to  occupy a premises. What we do do is 
assist workers before they leave to understand  what their rights and entitlements are and what they can expect 
while they're in Australia. When they arrive, we provide them with a briefing. Their employers are required —in Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 96 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  fact, I'm sure they would tell you about the lengths we go to to approve the accommodation plans that they 
submit. But it does remain — 
Senator COLBECK:   But for those who do the right thing, that's good. Minister Watt 's right. It's outrageous 
that this is occurring and continues to occur and that these individuals think that they can just keep on at it. 
They're talking about going to the Supreme Court now to appeal what TASCAT  has found to be poor behaviour. 
There are allegations of them bullying council officials. Have you had any conversations, for example, with the 
local government association  about what might be appropriate standards or oversight through the local 
government association, or whether there might be assistance to the local government association?  
Mr Stott :  I can't say with certainty. I'll take on notice whether we 've spoken to the local government 
association. I know we've had contact with many local governments, with state and territory governments, and 
with the raft of stakeholders who are engaged in this program on things like accommodation. In fact, we have a 
designated mechanism where we consult and keep ourselves updated with our stakeholders about accommodation 
issues.  
Senator COLBECK:   As far as you're concerned, under the scheme it is open to the workers who are coming 
in to secure their own accommodation . 
Mr Stott :  It's a fundamental right for those folks.  
Senator COLBECK:   I get that.  But on what planet are they expecting to be eighteen  to a room with a rice 
cooker at their bedhead on a matrix of extension cords through a house , with 40 of them in the house and boarded 
up windows ? 
Mr Stott :  I suppose that provides some indication around  why it's not approved within the scheme. It's not the 
standard that we would expect.  
Senator COLBECK:   But this is somebody getting around the scheme. They know what the rules  of the 
scheme  are. How do we keep them out of the system?  
Mr Stott :  Our intervention in this case is to ensure that the workers are aware of what their rights and 
responsibilities are, and it's the same with the approved employers —to understand their rights and responsibilities.  
We go to some lengths in educating and maintaining the currency of workers and employers about what those 
rights and responsibilities are, in order to help them make the best possible decisions. It's not within the capacity 
of the scheme to stop this person from trading, but it is within our capacity to not have it approved in the scheme, 
and it is not approved in the scheme.  
Senator COLBECK:   So effectively the only recourse that any of us have at the moment is first, any local 
government regulatory frameworks that might limit the occupancy of the residents, and naming and shaming 
people so that when they contact workers who might be wanting to come into Australia, the workers or those  that 
are bringing them in know to avoid  them. This is terribly exploitative behaviour, it really is.  For the local council 
manager now to be saying that in his council workforce, he's alleging harassment and intimidation against the 
people involved in this business, including one of his own councillors , which is pretty extraordinary. There must 
be some guidelines that councils need to apply. I'm not here to unnecessarily apply red tape , but this is a really 
important scheme for agriculture. You'd understand that, Minister. I certainly do. I talk to employers who are 
doing the right thing, providing good accommodation . We've got people running exploitative behaviour like this , 
and there's nothing in the scheme that can say these aren't fit and proper people to provide accommodation under 
the scheme. I get that it's difficult.  
Ms Rishniw :  I haven't been aware of this particular example. I think we can absolutely go and look at a 
compliance visit with that employer and talk to the workers who are there. We have put  in place a range of other 
measures that are trying to avoid worker exploitation, including complaints lines, including working with the 
heads of mission s around accommodation , including working with approved employers and peak bodies.  
Certainly in our consultations with peak bodies, they also don't want to see approved employers who are not 
doing the right thing.  
Senator COLBECK:   Is there a blacklist? Can you put them on a blacklist?  
Mr Stott :  It's more the reverse of that. There's a list of approved accommodation. We have been there. This 
matter has been going on for some time , well over 12 months. It is not approved accommodation within the 
scheme. It's not that there's a blacklist.  
Senator COLBECK:   We go back to the point that you've quite correctly made, that they do have a choice. 
But this is not accommodation that you would expect to find or  that they should expect to find.  It's not how they 
live at home.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 97 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Stott :  What we've been reminded of is that there are avenues for the workers who are there to be in 
contact with us if they find themselves in difficulty or in unacceptable accommodation or for a range of other 
factors. As well , there are our people on the ground who can attend those premises when a matter arises.  
Senator Watt:   As I understand it, one of the changes we have made to the deed is to bring in new processes to 
check at the front end when people are first being brought to Australia , checks on and requirements on the 
employers as to how many people they'll have in a house, number of bathrooms and things like that. I think 
they're relatively new changes  that we've brought in .  
Mr Stott :  We've refined  the existing requirements and brought in a degre e of consistency between what w ere 
the short -term and  the long -term programs, in some  ways to streamline and in other ways to strengthen those 
requirements.  
Senator Watt:   Without being an expert on planning law  by any means , my understanding is that the ongoing 
number of people in a house and the conditions of a house would probably be more a matter regulated by local 
governments under planning law. So there are some protections at the front end to get commitments from 
employers about the quality of accommodation. But if there are too many people in a home and things like that, 
that would  probably be more a matter  regulated by local governments. I think that's right ?  
Mr Stott :  That is correct.  
Senator COLBECK:   Forty  to a house is pretty out there. Windows boarded up.  
Senator Watt:   It's not on.  These are some of the issues that we've had to deal with in this scheme.  
Senator COLBECK:   Some of these people have very low literacy levels too , so they are relatively easily 
exploited in that contex t. They're probably not necessarily all that literate even in their own native language .  
Mr Stott :  To assist with that, w e do detailed pre -departure training  and arrival training  for workers who 
participate in the scheme. We have many fact sheets. Those that face workers are translated into relevant 
languages. And we require an approved employer to have  a welfare and wellbeing plan . Depending on the 
number of employees  they would then have a dedicated  welfare and wellbeing contact officer as part of their 
participation in the scheme , where these kinds of matters can go to.  That's notwithstanding the usual 
arrangements. M ost of the workers work in a small team with a leading hand or a foreman who can be the conduit 
between their employer and their team or even the department or our local presence.  
Senator COLBECK:   The problem is that this is seen as our scheme . It's a government program.  Yet when it 
comes to this element of it, the reasons you've articulated, it's hands off.  You see it in so many places . It's not just 
here. I've seen it in other areas as well. This is really bad exploitative behaviour by people who think 'That's 
fine—nothing to see here. ' As I said, it's a second time offender in the case of that particular property , prepared to 
go to court to maintain the business effectively , and not unhappy to harangue and harass council staff who are 
trying to do the right thing. But there doesn't seem to be any support from the sponsoring organisation, the 
Commonwealth, even for the  council . That's a frustration the council feels.  
Mr Stott :  In this instance workers were relocated.  
Senator COLBECK:   Only because the council said , 'You've got to leave the house. ' The council went in, said 
'It's not safe, it's a fire hazard. ' I've seen the photos. There  are 18 in a room. There  are extension cords all over the 
place , rice cookers next to the bed.  The council went in with the fire department . That's why they were moved. It 
had nothing to do with anybody else. It was the council finding out at this has happened again. And when the 
department's contacted,  it's hands off.  
Ms James :  I'm going to ask that we take a look at the deed with respect to this issue. Unfortunately, there are 
some unscrupulous operators in our country that do target vulnerable migrant workers and visa holders.  We've 
seen that in a number of areas , including worker underpayment. As you say, these are workers who are in the 
country because we've brought them here to work in our agricultural sector , among others. We do do a lot of work 
when it comes to wellbeing and pastoral care. I think we need to get the balance right between making sure that 
the employees  and workers have those choices about their accommodation but also the employer's responsibility 
generally around the welfare of what is their workforce while they're  here. We need to get that balance right. So 
I'm going to suggest that we just take a look and make sure that we do have the balance right. I'm going to ask our 
people to do that .  
Senator COLBECK:   We don't want messages about poor accommodation going back home and people 
saying it's not worth coming. There are other countries who are interested in this workforce too, so it is becoming 
a competitive space.  We need to make sure that people who are coming here are looked after. The remittances that 
are going back are important , and I acknowledge that , and that was dealt with by a colleague in previous Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 98 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  questions. But exploitative behaviour, repetitive exploitative behaviour , can't remain untouched or without any 
action. As reluctant as I am to push for regulation if it's not needed , clearly for some, something has to be done . 
And I think  local government needs some support in this.  
Ms James :  It can be difficult sometimes to get the balance right , but we'll take a look at the deed . With respect 
to who has responsibilities here , obviously the department has some responsibilities. It is the employer who is 
relying on this workforce and they have responsibilities with respect to the wellbeing of their workforce . Our deed 
is with those approved employers. It is quite an exhaustive process for employers to be approved and we need to 
make sure that they are aware if this sort of thing is going and that  there is some responsibilit y around it .  
Mr Stott :  Perhaps we can take on notice some detail. This matter go es back some 12 months and I can't quite 
recall exactly how it came to our attention. It would be remis s of me to not at least add some detail on how it 
came to our attention and the work that we did , particularly in the area of worker welfare, worker wellbeing and 
assist ance to relocate, ensuring the workers have access  to a standard of accommodation.   
Senator COLBECK:   I suspect that's when you came in, after the property was forced to close  or the workers 
were removed. I suspect that there might have been some assistance or contact with you in relation to alternative 
accommodation.  
Mr Stott :  It's plausible. I haven't got the detail with me.  
Senator COLBECK:   But y ou were clearly contacted by the media  because as the — 
Mr Stott :  I haven't seen this article  that you brought, but I've seen plenty of others .  
Senator COLBECK:   They've been tabled  so they're available to you . 
Mr Stott :  I've got that now.  
Senator COLBECK:   Reading from the Advocate  newspaper on 22 February last year.  
A federal government department has distanced itself from responsibilit y over the 'disgusting ' accommodation seasonal 
workers were living in a t a Shearwater house.  
… mayor, Mr Peter Fresh ney urged the federal government to step up the Australian Pacific Labour Mobility (PALM) 
scheme to ensure workers brought to Australia to work in the agricultur e industry are appropriately housed.  
And t hat's after the council forcibly removed 40 workers from the house  at Shearwater . 
Mr Stott :  I think what  we can to assist the committee is to take on notice how that matter  came to our 
attention  and detail what we did , and also describe how we would intervene in these circumstances , which 
includes the Welfare and Wellbeing plan and includes how we have employe es in particular plan for emergency 
type activities like continuity plans if there is  an incident, how we would do that . What's available to the 
employe es who are tenants in these scenarios, noting that we operate in all jurisdictions. That changes the 
proportion  of temporary restrictions  and cover off the requirements for accommodation. There is a requirement 
that the accommodation be approved by the local authority or the relevant authority given the state , territory or 
local government. That would go to some degree to assist  the committee . 
Ms Rishniw :  I think the secretary has made the commitment. We will review the deed  guidelines to see what 
other provisions we need to  put in there  to avoid exploitation. Since we insourced this program, t he government's 
first priority has been to reduce worker exploitation across the new deed guidelines. So we'll take that on board 
and review it and look at how else we could  work with local councils to address this.  
Senator Watt:   I've just had a look at the deed, Senator Colbeck , and there is the ability for the department to 
suspend an approved employer 's participation in this scheme for a range of reasons. I'm not across the detail of the 
deed. It might be that the officials are . There's also provision for termination of an employer. Without having read 
the detail of the deed , I can only assume there's some ability to take action against employers who do the wrong 
thing. I agree with you. That kind of behaviour is not on.  
Senator COLBECK:   But this wasn't the employer. This was somebody who was basically providing 
shithouse accommodation, to put it as it is , that the workers were living in. It wasn't the employer. It was 
somebody who was exploiting people that were working in the scheme in an accommodation sense.  
Senator Watt:   Sorry, I thought in the case that you were putting forward it was also the employer . 
Senator COLBECK:   No. It was the accommodation , which is the problem.  We see that because the 
determination was that the  workers had made a choice but not a satisfactory one.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I want to go to the changes that were announced in the budget in relation to 
mutual obligations. My first question is : how many people will those changes affect?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 99 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Rishniw :  While I wait for my colleagues to come, there were a range of measures announced in the 
budget that went to the first incremental response to issues that had been raised in the select committee report, 
particularly around mutual obligations. They went from preventing people from receiving a payment suspension 
for failure to attend an appointment with an employment provider when they're in work.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I'm very familiar with  what  the changes are. I'm interested to know whether you 
can tell me,  of all those measures in the first tranche that were announced in the budget, how many people overall 
will be impacted by those changes once they 're rolled out in their entirety . 
Ms Huender :  We did n't model specific numbers of people. Some of those measures will potentially impact 
everybody on the case load —for example , the movement from two days to five days to address missing a mutual 
obligation. That would potentially affect everybody on the case load.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   What is the total number of people on the case load at this point?  
Ms James :  While people are coming to the table , as at 30 March this year, the number was 664,236. T hat 
includes people on the Transition to Work program, which is a specialised youth program, as well as Workforce 
Australia services and Workforce Australia online.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Going to the removal around the caps for the medical exemption period, how 
many people and which demographics will that change impact?  
Ms Groney :  We've estimated that around 70,000 people will be impacted by no longer requiring to provide 
multiple medical certificate s. Currently, as an example, the exemptions for over 13 weeks are only for those when 
a person meets certain criteria and they have a medical condition such as cancer, leukaemia, severe stroke, an 
acquired brain  injury , serious  burns , serious physical injuries requiring long recovery period s or a severe mental 
health condition. With the changes, there will no longer be the 13 -week time limit for temporary incapacity and in 
the case of incapacity due to serious illness. We 've got an example that we can give. There will no longer be the 
13-week time limits applied for anything outside of those categories  that I've talked about . A medical 
practitioner's assessment of the duration  of the incapacity will be used to determine the period of a person's 
exemption. For example, if someone fell and sustained multiple fractures  and had post -surgical complications and 
the doctor expected that they would be  unable to work for eight hours or more per week for the next 14 months, 
that would be included on the medical certificate and would be the exemption time limit.  
Ms Rishniw :  That's obviously an estimate . It w ill vary depending on medical conditions as they present. We 
hope that Ms Groney's injury won't result in anything like that ! 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   When it refers to a cohort of 'certain income support recipients', is that referring 
to that list you read out of people with those various conditions? Is that an exhaustive list or is it an inexhaustive 
list? 
Ms Groney :  Currently , the list I read out is a list where that 13 -week period does not apply. From 1  January 
2025 the changes will expand to include  any medical certificate , even ones outside those conditions.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Thank you, that 's much clearer. How is it envisaged that that will interact with 
the disability support pension?  
Ms Groney :  JobSeeker has a temporary incapacity  category , which is when someone is  unable to work eight 
hours or more per week and is also unable to undertake another appropriate activity for eight hours or more a 
week due to a medical condition . By contrast , a condition is considered permanent , for the purposes of the 
disability support pension , if the condition is likely to persist for more than two years. The changes that we're  
making are under that temporary category. Those that are in receipt of the disability support pension are 
permanent or have over two years of incapacity.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   So it's possible that someone could have their medical certificate to have  that 
medical exemption , and that could  be unlimited . Then, during that time , for example, if someone  gets medical 
evidence to say  that this is actually going to be — 
Ms Rishniw :  An ongoing and lasting  disability. This exemption is really designed around people who have  
medical conditions  who are  expected to make a recovery down the track. We would expect medical advice to 
have a timeframe of when they 're expected to be able to rejoin the labour market to participate again. If it 's a 
permanent and lasting incapacity, they would then need to be assessed on medical advice on whether the 
disability support pension is available or not.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I imagine it would be possible in some instances  to have someone where the 
medical doctor  or specialist says , for example, 'At this point in time we 're not sure .' So they might have that 
ongoing exemption but then , at some point , it might become clear that they then become eligible for the DSP . Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 100 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Does being on this shorter term , interim position impact your ability , going forward , to get access to the DSP once 
it's been confirmed that your condition is permanent?  
Ms Rishniw :  All of these things will rely on medical advice and medical evidence. It shouldn't  impact on a 
person's ability to access DSP. Ultimately , though , what I think the government has made clear in the white paper 
and what we are working towards is making sure that people are able to participate and enjoy the fruits of 
participating in the labour market when they are able  to on medical advice.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Going to the reduction in suspensions, it was mentioned that someone from the 
government told the Guardian  that there are one million welfare payment suspensions every year . I think they 
said that they thought they 'd be halved. Anyway, that 's irrelevant. My question is: have you modelled the 
reduction in suspensions?  
Ms Rishniw :  We've looked at the interaction . There are a number of measures here that  interact together. You 
talked about reduction  and suspension , the reconnection period from two to five days  and the fact that if someone 
fails to meet their mutual obligation the first time it does n't count towards a penalty or demerit , because we 
acknowledge that they may not realise they had that mutual obligation  or we give them a chance to actually 
reconnect and engage. So w e've looked at the overall package. In terms of specifics, I do n't know the article or the 
number that you're particularly quoting but — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   So maybe I'll get more to the point . Is it possible to give an estimate or a 
number around what that might be , or is it really the sum of a whole lot of moving parts?  
Ms Huender :  In terms of the change on the reconnection point  from two to five days, if people were not to 
change their behaviour in anyway —it just assumes  that they would certainly reconnect within that additional 
three -day period ; that would reduce suspensions by up to around a  million suspensions. However, what we do n't 
know is what behaviour people will exhibit when they have that longer period of time. For some people, they will 
reconnect within the five days,  and, for other people , they may still not reconnect within the five days , or they 
may only reconnect at that five-day period. So there is a behavioural element in there that makes it very hard to 
put a particular figure on it , and, as Ms Rishniw  says, there 's also the piece that there are a variety of measures 
here which  all work together. So it's probably challenging to put actual figure on it . We do expect a reduction , 
though.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I noticed you talking about participant behaviour . It is fair to say , though, isn't 
it, that some suspensions are occurring due to provider behaviour? We 've heard stories from people that providers 
have made appointment times that are absolutely not possible for someone to actually meet. So it' s not just a case, 
is it, of participants who are making errors ? There are also actions on behalf of providers in some instances . 
Ms Huender :  That's correct , and there's a particular budget measure that goes to exactly that point. We 've also 
had feedback that provide rs are scheduling appointments when people are meant to be at work or have scheduled 
work. Again, we 've had a behavioural piece with providers  about  not doing this . This make s it emphatic , in 
making a specific change where by individuals can no longer be suspended for not attending an appointment .  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Why five days?  
Ms Rishniw :  One of the recommendations out of the select committee report actually looked at the average 
time for most people to reconnect . The report recommended  that five days would allow the majority of people 
who may have a completely valid excuse for not necessarily reconnecting —that was seen as a good indicator for 
giving people sufficient time to reconnect with their employment service provider.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Is it the case that a lot of the people who do n't reconnect quickly are actually 
some of those people who are really vulnerable and have lots of complex issues ? They are the people who require  
the most support , and in some instances they 're the ones  who are  getting their payments cut off. 
Ms Rishniw :  As I said , we're kind of looking at all the measures together , and it's about how you make sure 
that there is a human decision -maker involved before the penalties are applied. It 's also fair to say that the 
notification for someone to re -engage , compared to actually cutting off their payment , is a very different kind of 
scenario. But we are working to make the system a much more engagement focused system and actually take into 
account the recommendations that came through the select committee report.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   You'll have to forgive me; I haven't read that report. Did that report recommend 
five days?  
Ms Rishniw :  Yes.  
Ms Huender :  It recommended four to five days, no more.  
CHAIR:   Senator  Allman -Payne, are you close to  your final question?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 101 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I am close to finishing.  
CHAIR:   You've got time for another question.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Thank you. My next question is : why the specific staggered rollout , in the way 
that it is ? I put to you that it  has the potential to make it more confusing for people , because a whole bunch of 
changes are happening at four months , six months and nine months. I note,  for example , that  the change around 
an APS decision -maker is actually nine months away . Yet  what I'm hearing is that there are real issues with not 
having an APS decision -maker . So, w hy the timeframe ?  
I also have a question to the minister . Minister, given that we 've heard that not having an APS decision -
maker —again, for example —is disadvantaging participants , why the insistence on continuing  with things like 
mutual obligations when you could suspend some of those things until this is put in place?  
I'll go to the department first and then the minister.  
Ms Rishniw :  One of the things we're doing is trying to adjust the system incrementally and make sure the IT 
builds are accurate and appropriate and don't add penalties or don't work inadvertently against what the 
government has decided to do. S o some of it is IT driven. At the same time , we're trying to do the behavioural 
piece with providers and with users of our system. So we  are also working with some of the social citizenry and 
social services peak bod ies to look at how we can better communicate some of these changes to the users of our 
system. I wouldn't want to suggest in any way that this is a staggered rollout without a whole range of behavioural 
communication pieces also going on.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Minister, I think I know what you're going to say , but I'll ask you again — 
Senator Watt:   We went over this before. I said that we acknowledge that there are significant problems  with 
the employment services scheme, which is why we're reforming it. We don't pretend that we  have fixed it all yet. 
There's more  to be done. We also need to work in the world of the possible , and my understanding is that , from 
the department's point of view , this date was the achievable date in the circumstances that we're in . But obviously 
we want to continue improving this program going forward.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   We saw in COVID that it was very simple to suspend mutual obligations , given 
extenuating  circumstances. Given the things that have come out in the inquiry —which are clearly issues, because 
you are moving to address some of these things —what's the rationale for persisting with putting  people through 
that system?  
Senator Watt:   I have covered this. As a government, we support the concept of mutual obligations , and we 
don't intend to change that  while we continue upgrading the systems.  
Ms Rishniw :  Just to add to that, the select committee report actually acknowledged that some form of mutual 
obligation that is appropriate —that actually activates people —should be retained. So it was a joint select 
committee report that recommended we keep some form of mutual obligations  but make them  more appropriate to 
the people they apply to.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Thank you.  
Senator TYRRELL:   I'd like to ask some questions about the Rebuilding employment services report from the 
Select Committee on Workforce Australia Employment Services . 
Ms Rishniw :  That's the report I was just referring to .  
Senator TYRRELL:   I liked that report. When can we expect the government 's response to this report?  
Senator Watt:   That's probably more appropriate for me fo r me to answer,  I guess. We intend to respon d in the 
coming months . I'm not sure if you were in the room before the break when I mentioned that we are , in the 
meantime , taking a number of measures to improve employment services , like the ones we announced in the 
budget.  
Senator TYRRELL:   Did you address recommendation 75 of the report ?  
Senator Watt:   I know it well ! 
Ms Rishniw :  It's the last recommendation in the report!  
Senator TYRRELL:   Everybody wants to get to that one ! Basically, that one is about  the pilot for a jobs hub 
program. Is this something we're going to actively pursue?  
Ms Rishniw :  Obviously the response to the report is a matter for government to consider , as the minister has 
outlined. I can tell you that we have been having discussions with the Tasmanian government and the Victorian 
government . They were two governments that were recommended in the select committee report as areas of state 
action that we should partner with and have a look at. We have been meeting actively with the relevant Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 102 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  departments to get a better understanding of what's working and wh y—and, equally, what's not working and why . 
In terms of a response to that specific recommendation , that will be a matter for government.  
Senator TYRRELL:   So stand by? The recommendation did say it should be done ASAP , and that was in 
December. So , basically , we're just waiting on the government to come out with an announcement?  
Ms Rishniw :  Once again , I'm  not speaking on behalf of the ministers, but , in the general way that 
governments respond to any report of this size and scale, the government would usually respond to the whole 
report, not individual recommendations . In the budget , there were some incremental steps to address in particular 
the most urgent issues that the select committee identified. That was a decision for government. But, a s I said, I 
would expect that in the normal course of events the government would normally respond to any report of this 
scale and size in a comprehensive way.  
Senator TYRRELL:   Is the Tasmanian state government being friendly? Are they actually being cooperative?  
Ms Rishniw :  We have  had really productive conversations with the state government, particularly  with the 
employment and economic development area. We have had a number of meetings a bout in particular  the 
approach that they have taken to an economic development and participation model —not just an employment 
services model. We're having really productive conversations.  
Senator Watt:   Senator Watt, is  there any reason why it wasn't in the budget?  
Senator TYRRELL:   It might be  that the departmental officials can talk to why these measures were actioned 
straight away in the budget. I suspect some of the recommendations are a bit more complicated  and need 
negotiation with state governments . There are some things that we can get moving on faster than others . I would 
expect that that's one of the reasons why some  measures  have been addressed in the budget while others  are being 
worked through. Is that fair?  
Ms Rishniw :  That's right.  
Senator TYRRELL:   I love it when you both agree! Recommendation 39 of the report says the government 
should integrate commercial digital jobs marketplace s into a new employment services  system. Has this been 
considered by the department at all?  I used to work in it. Digital job search  sucks , but it's amazing too.  
Ms Rishniw :  The team is looking up that specific recommendation , because  I don't have all of it  entirely to 
mind. But , certainly , we have a strong Workforce Australia online presence now in the digital contact centre 
doing a lot of really good work with jobseekers who are more job  ready , closer to the labour market . They are 
working on enabling them to be able to do a digital job search but also have engagement with our system through 
digital means from  their home. In terms of the digital job search requirement s, I might get my colleague to 
address that specifically.  
Mr Le Maitre :  This recommendation has been considered as part of the broader response to the committee's 
report. We  are at the  very early stages of consideration. It will be responded to in the broader response.  
Senator TYRRELL:   Review of active  job search used to be the responsibility of the employment provider. Is 
that going to be taken away ? I know that with the ones I used to work for  it was sometimes a bit of a sliding scale 
as to what was considered a good job search and good reporting.  
Ms Rishniw :  I don't think we can go to the detail of a specific response of this recommendation without the 
government's broader consideration. One of the things that we are actively considering is : what is the right level 
of job search and what  are the right  kind of jobs , depending on where you are in terms  of your skills, your 
readiness, your participation — 
Senator TYRRELL:   Rural and regional areas, job availability — 
Ms Rishniw :  Yes. And markets.  
Senator TYRRELL:   The Rebuilding employment services report recommended a return to the 
Commonwealth Public Service system . I'm a big fan of that. Has the department started to scope out what that 
might look like?  
Ms Rishniw :  Once again, it's a matter for government consideration , in terms of a response to the broader 
select committee report. I think it's fair to say though that APS service delivery has increased across employment 
services in a range of areas.  I've already talked about Workforce Australia Online and our digital contact centre, 
particularly for those that are more job ready and are able to avail themselves of more self -service options but also 
have someone online who can guide them through  job search  criteria and mutual obligations . But there's also  joint 
delivery in areas like Broome and Yarrabah  in terms of development and co -design of employment service 
delivery —in the case of Broome , with a First Nations provider —all the way through to APS delivery of some of Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 103 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  the employment facilitators, particularly around the net zero engagement and transition of regional communities 
in the net zero transition.   
Like I say, we have started to look at where APS delivery is fit for purpose and ready to engage in delivery of 
employment services . But, in terms of the broader response and looking at the employment service system as a 
whole, that  is a matter for government.  
Senator TYRRELL:   A big part of the success of this is going to be actually having people delivering the 
services. DSS has had falls in the number of staff  they've had. I've been to a call centre here in Canberra , and it's 
an amazing  thing,  but people are still  on wait lists, they're still  waiting for calls to be picked up and  they're  still 
having problems with their applications. Aged -care applications are up to 100 -odd days , and similarly for DSP 
applications. Is there going to be a time in the next year where people are going to be looked after appropriately 
by this service?  [inaudible] s tatement I know , but staffing and resourcing . 
Ms Rishniw :  I wouldn't want to comment on other programs that are the responsibility of other agencies and 
other departments. I can say that one of the things that we have been working hard on is our digital contact centre 
and our service centre. The recent budget had an additional investment in the digital contact centre because people 
are engaging so effectively and actively with it. The feedback that we get and the client satisfaction surveys that 
we do with the contact centre show that they feel like they are getting good engagement  and they are getting 
services that they need and value. We are trialling a few different ways to make sure that the services that people 
get are appropriate, effective and well targeted.  
Senator TYRRELL:   Is there going to be better interaction between employment service providers and 
Centrelink /DSS? It used to work really well because you could deal with people's issues in real time and not just 
schedule an appointment for two days time. Is there a plan to make it better in any way there?  
Ms Rishniw :  Once again, without pre -empting the government's response to the report, one of the things that 
we are actively working through is how we  make sure that we try and capture people's information once —that 
they tell their story once —and have  the right systems interacting . We have a trial of the use of Single  Touch 
Payroll to better integrate people being able to  easily  provide proof of their income , for example. So w e are 
working through how we  make the system more seamless for users overall . 
Senator TYRRELL:   Does it feel a little bit strange , because I'm assuming you guys have been in this space 
for a while , that we're looking at reverting back to something  that—I'm old —was in the eighties  and worked 
really well? Does it feel strange we're looking at  the good old days , to drag them into the 21st century?  
Ms James :  As someone who was in the predecessor department in 1996 at the time the decision to outsource 
employment services was first made , I would say that , while we might say it's back to the future, the report that 
you're referring to is very much putting a future  focus ed lens on where we might be going. As we advis e 
government , we are advising government  about a modern system that best supports all of the different sorts of 
people in our employment services system  in a way that is tailored and first and foremost respects the people in 
the system and takes a human capital approach. The first question we ask is : what is the right support and service 
for these people ? The 'who delivers it ?' should come next.  
But we do need to consider very much that incentives in any system are very important. When you have 
systems that are based on payments per outcome, which is very accountable on one level, you also can incentivise 
certain behaviours that aren't what you want. First and foremost , in the report you're referring to, there  are a large 
number of recommendations. You 've taken us through a few here tonight . We do need to look at how they'll work 
together , what changes might be appropriate for our labour market today  and into the future, while also 
considering the employment white paper the Treasurer released and ensuring that we have a system that is fit for a 
modern labour market.  
Senator TYRRELL:   We're  trying to take the dollar sign  from above the ir head. I like that.  That's me. Thank 
you. 
CHAIR:   Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   If I could turn to some questions in relation to the ParentsNext program. It 's been announced 
the ParentsNext program will be extended to 30 October this year.  Is that correct?  
Ms Spanos :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   The new voluntary pre -employment service will commence, as I said, from 1 November 
2024. How many ParentsNext  providers  were offered the four -month extension?  
Ms Spanos :  Fifty -two out of the 53 ParentsNext providers were offered contract extensions by the 
department.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 104 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   So one was not.  
Ms Spanos :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   That seems unusual. On what basis was the one not offered a contract extension?  
Ms Spanos :  One provider was not offered an extension due to ongoing assurance concerns that are currently 
being investigated by the department.  
Senator CASH:   Ongoing assurance concerns?  What does that mean?  
Ms Spanos :  That means they 're currently under investigation , and, because the investigation is ongoing , I 
cannot provide further detail at this time.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Of the 52 out of the 53 providers that were offered the extension, did all choose 
to accept it?  
Ms Spanos :  Not all  of them . As of 6 May, 47 providers of the 52 had had their deed of variation executed by 
the department. One provider is currently considering the offer. The remaining four providers  chose not to extend 
their contract.  
Senator CASH:   Four chose not to extend. What then happened to those contracts that they were offered?  
Ms Spanos :  The ones who chose not to extend?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, the four who chose not to extend.  
Ms Spanos :  They will end on 30 June this year , as originally planned.  
Senator CASH:   So they just didn't get the extension, but they are continuing  to 30 June.  
Ms Rishniw :  That's right. Can I just add that parents who are receiving a service through those four providers 
will be transferred to other providers.  
Senator CASH:   That was my next question. For the providers who don't continue  with the extension, w hat 
are the  transition plans?  
Ms Spanos :  We w ill be working with the providers who did accept an extension , and we will be transferring 
and reallocating the current participants to the continuing providers.  Just to be very clear, there is not an 
employment region where there is not a continuing provider.  
Senator CASH:   So all employment regions will continue to be covered by those who have chosen to accept 
the extension that was offered to them.  
Ms Spanos :  That is correct.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of  the four providers who chose not to  extend , were any of those providers in remote 
or Indigenous communities?  
Ms Rishniw :  We may need to take that on notice.  
Ms Spanos :  I think we would take that on notice . ParentsNext is not delivered in remote locations , but I'll take 
it on notice to come back to you with th at detail.  
Senator CASH:   I'm looking at my next questio n, and it flows from that . When I see that answer , I'll be able to 
put the rest of them to you. When will applicants for the new service, the one that commences on 1 November 
2024 , be advised of the outcomes of the tender process?  
Ms Spanos :  As we outlined in the request for tender, we 're expecting successful tenderer s to be informed  and 
announced in  September  to October this year.  
Senator CASH:   When are the successful applicants expected to commence the new service?  
Ms Spanos :  1 November.  
Senator CASH:   Will the re be a reasonable adjustment made for full commencement by successful providers , 
or are you expecting them to set up a service potentially the next day  after they're told that they're  successful?  
Ms Spanos :  We would certainly work with each successful tenderer on the ir circumstances to see what that is 
on a place -by-place situation , but w e are expecting there to be a service from 1 November.  
Senator CASH:   And that 's across all employment regions?  
Ms Spanos :  That is  the aim , yes.  
Senator CASH:   So they will be advised in September  to October , and that is just the issue that then arises . If 
it commences on 1 November 2024, how does the department ensure that that timeframe is suitable so you do n't 
get into a situation when someone 's not ready to go  and provide the service  as of 1 November?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 105 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Rishniw :  Obviously , there was a tender out in the market . Application s closed at the end of April. The 
tender documentation made it very clear that you would be expected to be able to have a service that was able to 
commence from 1 November . I would n't want to pre -empt or presuppose how we might address any successful 
tenderers . We would expect them to be able to set up services from 1 November . That w as part of the tender 
documentation.  
Senator CASH:   I understand the department has included new requirements for qualifications for all staff 
levels in the new program but also refers to staff having experience, including 'lived experience '. Are those 
qualifications mandatory , or will lived experience suffice?  
Ms Spanos :  I'll just get that detail for you.  
Senator CASH:   As part of that, can you explain exactly what 'lived experience ' means?  
Ms Spanos :  I'm just referring to the request -for-tender documentation. Just to be clear, you wanted to know if 
staff qualifications will be mandated?  Was that the question?  
Senator CASH:   Correct. Will the qualifications be mandatory , or will lived experience suffice?  
Ms Spanos :  We do ask for qualifications or suitable lived experience.  
Senator CASH:   Or suitable lived experience.  
Ms Spanos :  Correct. The definition we 're using for suitable lived experience  is based on the Mental Health 
Commission glossary and link . I can provide that to you in a second.  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes, b ut I just want to go to your question around the mandatory aspect. We will be expecting 
providers to adhere to those requirements. W e will ask successful tenderers to demonstrate  that their staffin g 
profile will have a suitable mix of qualifications and experience , and, where staff do not have relevan t 
qualifications , evidence will be required t hat they are actively working towards qualifications. Did you want me 
to outline how we would  do that?  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind doing that?  
Ms Spanos :  To meet the department's expectation for staff qualifications, it will be necessary for successful 
tenderers to undertake  a skills audit of mentors at regular intervals over the course of the deed . A skills audit will 
give us an understanding of what skill shortages exist within their service and work towards filling those gaps. 
We will also have key performance indicators that will be developed to measure the extent to which providers are 
meeting these requirements.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. But it is an 'or' in terms of lived experience ? You may have that , and that will 
then suffice for a qualification ? 
Ms Spanos :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   And you're going to provide me with — 
Ms Spanos :  Sorry, did you want me to let you know  the definition of 'lived experience '? 
Senator CASH:   Yes, I was just about to ask. Would you mind?  
Ms Spanos :  The definition of 'lived experience' is someone who has values that are transferred into practice, 
values about  others and belief in others. Mentors with lived experience need to have the following qualities: 
empathy, no assumptions or judgement, resilience, emotional robust ness, patien ce, self -reflective ness, self -
aware ness, and ability to recognise their limits.  
Senator CASH:   Who makes the determination as to whether or not they have lived experience?  
Ms Spanos :  We would undertake an audit , as I said before, so I will refer back to that bit if you need me to.  
Ms Rishniw :  Obviously  we're  expecting the successful providers to have a mix of skills in the ir service that is 
able to address the needs of parents, noting that this is a voluntary program that relies on engagement of parents to 
deliver that pre -employment training.  
Ms Spanos :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Are those  not very subjective criteria?  
Ms Rishniw :  It's a mix of criteria . It's a  mix of qualifications and lived experience. Lived experience is well  
known and well used in the mental health area . It's also  relatively well  used in areas such as disability. It's for the 
tenderers to demonstrate how their mix of skills within the ir tender document ation actually meets those  
requirements.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 106 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Spanos :  And it's ongoing . I would say  that, if you're  a site manager and had previous experience 
managing sites of similar services , that would obviously be accepted as well.  
Senator CASH:   As lived experience?  
Ms Spanos :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. I understand the department is undertaking a public service pilot in South Australia  for 
the new program, in Playford . Is that correct?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes, that is correct.  
Senator CASH:   Who 's delivering the pilot?  
Ms Robertson :  It will be the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations that will be managing that 
pilot.  
Senator CASH:   So you are not  working with an external provider ; it will be  internal to the department?  
Ms Robertson :  No. We are recruiting for that service.  
Senator CASH:   Wha t's that process?  
Ms Robertson :  We're advertising through our normal channels for people at the moment , but we're also 
looking at how we can be a little bit more flexible with our advertising, to make sure that we get people with the 
appropriate skills and experience.  
Senator CASH:   Just going back to the skills and experience we were referring to previously  and, in 
particu lar, the question of whether  the qualifications are  mandatory  or whether the lived experience will suffice : 
who's the actual decision -maker as to  whether or not what 's put forward meets the relevant criteria? Is there a 
point s system et cetera? How are you actually going to rank the lived experience and the qualifications?  
Ms Spanos :  As I said before, we would ask the provider to undertake a skills audit , and the department would 
assess that audit and then en sure it meets the requirements we've set out in the tender documentation.  
Senator CASH:   Is there an appeal mechanism if a tenderer believes that the decision -maker hasn't  recognise d 
the qualifications of one of the providers?  
Ms Spanos :  I think, Senator, you 're getting to a level of detail that we would need to set out within the 
program guidelines , and at this stage we have not publish ed those.  
Senator CASH:   The program guidelines are not yet published.  
Ms Spanos :  No. 
Senator CASH:   I was going to ask , then:  is past performance taken into account?  
Ms Spanos :  Past performance in what way ? Sorry.  
Senator CASH:   How you've previously performed  in the program , for example . 
Ms Spanos :  Are you talking about a tender process?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Spanos :  Sorry , I thought you might still have been  talking about the staff qualifications . We don't discuss 
the assessment process of a current tender that's underway. We are assessing based on  the selection criteria within 
the request for tender.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. If someone has successfully — 
Ms Spanos :  Sorry. It' s a new progra m, though . Just t o be very clear, this is a new program , with very new 
parameters , and it is a voluntary program. I think that is a key point to make as well here.  
Senator CASH:   Just on that , then—it being a new program with new parameters —how do the parameters for 
the new program commencing on 1 November differ from th ose for th e program that 's currently in place?  
Ms Spanos :  Would you like me to run through a series of difference?  
Senator CASH:   Would you mind, just so I get an understanding of what 's changed.  
Ms Spanos :  No worries. Firstly, I think it's very important to make clear it 's a voluntary program , and it will 
be. The eligibility for the program has also changed. Now parents are also eligible if not getting a Centrelink 
payment and either are under 22 years old, do n't have a year 12 qualification or ar e Aboriginal or Torres Strait 
Islander. That 's another clear difference in that program , which is an important aspect. Another aspect that's quite 
different is that one tendering organisation will be contracted to deliver the service in each employment region or 
selected postcodes within an employment region. So it's only one ; at the moment you can have a number of Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 107 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Parents Next providers in one postcode or location. That's another clear difference. I'd also like to point out the 
payment structure for the new service, if you'd like me to  run through that . 
Senator CASH:   Would you mind , just so I know the differences.  
Ms Spanos :  Of course. There's definitely been a very key focus on engagement. The new service has 
obviously been designed in consultation with parents. As part of that the payment structure for the new service is 
$1,500 per parent for each six months of servicing. The current service is  $626.40. That's a clear difference  with a 
focus on engagement . 
Senator CASH:   Over the same period of time?  
Ms Spanos :  That's c orrect. This is a voluntary service , so obviously we do expect successful tenderers to drive 
engagement and what we call their case load. That does recognise the intensive servicing that they will get. 
There's also one thing that is a little bit similar , but there are still slight differences , and that is that  we do have a 
participation fund in the current program. What we have going forward is an individual fund credit per parent per 
year, which is $1,250 accredited to each parent per year which gives parents discretion over purposes such as 
course fees, materials and other supports they might need.  
Senator CASH:   So the parent gets to choose how that $1,200 — 
Ms Spanos :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   And there are guidelines  for— 
Ms Spanos :  There will be guidelines, but  I think i t's important to note the difference. In the current program , 
you would get a pooled fund. At the moment , for example , in ParentsNext a parent comes with a nominated $600 
amount , but it's pooled and it's upon commencement. Just to be clear : there is also in the new program a $600 
one-off pooled fund credit per parent  that can be — 
Senator CASH:   On top of the $1,250?  
Ms Spanos :  Correct . That can be spent by providers at their discretion across the case load to support a 
broader range of purchases  as well . So there are t wo different streams , which is different to the current program. 
There's an amount specifically allocated to an individual and then there's a pooled amount allocated  to a provider . 
Senator CASH:   The $600 is the pooled amount . 
Ms Spanos :  Correct. That's v ery similar to the current participation fund. Also, t here is up to $25,000 in 
outreach home payment s for the promotion of the service for each permanent site. Again, that's about ensuring 
that providers have the supports they need to identify parents in their community that may benefit from this 
service  as well . 
Senator CASH:   When you say 'across each site ', times how many sites with the $25,000?  
Ms Spanos :  There is a lim it. 
CHAIR:   Sorry, Senator Cash. I'm mindful that Senator  Allman -Payne would like to get a segment as well.  
Senator CASH:   I'll continue on with my questions on P arents Next. 
Ms Spanos :  To finalise that, there's a cap of up to $250,000 per employment region.  
Senator CASH:   How many employment regions are there?  
Ms Spanos :  The request for tender listed 52 employment regions.  
Senator CASH:   So up to $250,000 could be spent in all 52  employment regions ? 
Ms Spanos :  Yes. However, to be clear, we will require successful tenderers , once they're a provider , to 
demonstrate what they're spending those funds on and account for those , and the department can claim any 
unspent funds.  
Senator CASH:   We'll go to Senator Allman -Payne. I want to come back and explore that.  
Ms Spanos :  And they're linked to a full -time site.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Thank you. I just want to refer to an article that appeared in the Guardian , 
which talks about the fact that jobseekers have been harassed by service providers for payslips when they're not 
meant to  be. It is the case, isn't it, that private job providers can claim public money when jobseekers find work?  
Ms Rishniw :  An employment services provider gets a payment on a four -, 12- and 26 -week outcome basis. So 
it's not when the jobseeker first gets a job , but four-, 12- and 26 -week outcome payments.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 108 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Okay. We know that this is happening. We know that job service providers are 
still insisting that people provide payslips. Do you have to hand how many times or what specific directives have 
been given to job agencies to stop them from inappropriately hassling and pressuring people for payslips ? 
Ms Rishniw :  I will get Ms Tran to respond to that. But we should make it clear that employment services 
providers shouldn't be demanding or harassing users of the services for payslips. We have made that clear on a 
number of occasions. We have made a number of — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Yes. And that's what I want information about, because we have information — 
and this article makes clear too —that it is still happening. In fact, I've had a constituent contact me and say that 
they have again had a job service provider hassling them for payslips. We have lots of people who are telling us 
this is still going on. So I'm interested to know what you have done to date to try and stop that.  
Ms Tran :  As Ms Rishniw said, we have on a number of occasions done portal notices which go out to all 
Workforce Australia providers. So we — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Is that like a broadcast email?  
Ms Tran :  It is on their website —the online portal that they have to our system.  
Ms Catelli :  All providers have access to a portal . We regularly communicate to all our providers through that 
particular portal.  
Ms Tran :  Yes. So the first portal notice went out on 23 June 2023, which made very clear that providers are 
not to harass or bully participants into providing payslips. We also did another portal notice on 8 April.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   This year?  
Ms Tran :  This year, 2024. We also did one on 29 April 2024. Since October 2022 , we have also been looking 
at ensuring , through program assurance activities , that providers are not inappropriately applying the targeted 
compliance framework to participants who are not providing payslips. So there is a range of measures that we do. 
And, if we do find that there is inappropriate behaviour, we will take action accordingly, either through the breach 
management framework or —there is also an avenue through our provider performance framework which goes — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   How many providers would you have had to have taken steps with beyond just 
the three notices on the portal through your compliance activities to actually take further action than just that?  
Ms Tran :  To date, my understanding is we haven't  actually taken any compliance action for this particular 
issue. We will need to take that on notice.  
Ms Rishniw :  Can we take that on notice, because obviously our compliance area looks at that specifically. We 
also have a regular provider forum in which we talk to providers virtually . So every month we get providers 
together. We have made it very clear that this behaviour is not acceptable. Can I suggest, if you're still getting 
reports of this from jobseekers , referring them to our national complaints line.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   One of the things that I've noted too is that if you ring the complaints line at the 
moment —because this is one of the changes that has to come in —they will tell you to go back to your job service 
provider and try and sort it out . And then, and only then , will they do something.  
Ms Rishniw :  We are starting to take a closer look. While we are getting a broader independent compliance 
piece in, which was announced in the budget, we're also looking at the complaints line and the calls coming 
through so we can pay particular attention to when clients raise the issue of payslips.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   So, at the moment, if someone rings that line, is it the case that you will collect 
the data to say that is what they said ? But at this point in time they will still get referred back to the job service 
provider first?  
Ms Rishniw :  I think it will depend on the particular nature of their complaint in terms of where they get 
referred and — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   It just — 
Ms Rishniw :  No, I hear what you're saying — 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   It just strikes me —I'm new to this portfolio and all I've heard since this 
morning is : 'We made an error with Centrepay but we're fixing it ', 'The providers aren't doing the right thing but 
we're talking to them ' and  'The providers aren't doing this but we're building relationships '. And it just strikes me 
that there is one rule for income support recipients and there is a completely different rule for these providers. 
And they're multimillion dollar companies in most cases.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 109 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Rishniw :  There is a range of different providers. But your point is well made in that we are absolutely 
looking at where providers are repeatedly asking clients for their payslips and looking at direct action with those 
providers.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Are you aware that at the moment there are still job service providers that are 
completely disregarding the advice you have given them?  
Ms Rishniw :  We are not aware of any at the moment —not that I'm aware of. We have made these repeated 
announcements. We have told them through various forums. But, as I said, if you can refer people who are still 
finding this— 
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   I'm sure there are plenty of people out there right now who, when we tell them  
to contact you about this —you're going to find out there are a lot of people for whom this is still happening.  
Ms Rishniw :  And we will take that seriously and act on it.  
Senator ALLMAN -PAYNE:   Okay.  
CHAIR:   We will take a 10 -minute break.  
Proceedings suspended from 20:41 to 20:51  
Senator CASH:   I will return please to ParentsNext. In relation to the up to $250,000 per employment si te 
across the 52 sites, could you explain what that is for?  
Ms Spanos :  Just to be very clear, there's a cap of $250,000 for this outreach payment per employment region.  
Senator CASH:   So it's called an outreach payment, is it?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes. Let me find you the details. I want to be very clear that there is a cap. It's up to $25,000 in an 
outreach fund payment for each permanent site. So that's for each permanent site, but, to be clear, there's a cap of 
$250,000 per employment region. So you can't put 50 sites in.  
Senator CASH:   What is it actually for?  What can you spend it on?  
Ms Robertson :  In terms of the engagement and outreach funding,  it's really about making the service more 
accessible to parents to support their voluntary engagement. This is about going out into the community, to go out 
where parents are already engaging in other services, with a view to actually sell the benefits of the service  and 
the service offer  that's being provided  and what the new program will be able to do for those parents. It will be 
able to be used to cover things like advertising, local radio, print, billboard, social media, other Internet related 
material ; local face -to-face promotion such as pop -up stalls and community hubs, shopping centres or 
promotional gathering s, that sort of thing; b randing of assets ; as well as transport costs and contributions towards 
people that are actually undertaking those outreach activities.  
Senator CASH:   What do you mean by transport costs?  
Ms Robertson :  If they have to do petrol or parking, public transport, that sort of thing.  
Senator CASH:   Per individual participant?  
Ms Robertson :  No. This is for the outreach worker. The engagement and outreach funding is to get out into 
the community to go and engage the parents. This is about funding that particular activity that the provider will be 
doing.  
Senator CASH:   The providers will have the outreach worker?  
Ms Robertson :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   Going back to the Playford South Australia pilot, how was the  pilot site chosen?  
Ms Spanos :  Playford was chosen on a number of factors : socio-economic demographics, the case load size, 
the relative geographical size of the region, transport options, and proximity to other government services.  
Senator CASH:   Why is the pilot occurring ? What was the reason for the pilot?  
Ms Rishniw :  It was a government decision as part of the funding for this program to trial APS delivery  at one 
site.  
Ms Spanos :  There were a couple of goals, key objectives . They are to evaluate the effectiveness of APS 
delivery ; to raise APS capacity in line with APS reform objectives ; and to test APS capacity and leveraging across 
government infrastructure and connection.  
Senator CASH:   Will the  funding for the government pilot at Playford in South Australia be at the same level 
of funding for external providers when they get their contracts?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 110 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Spanos :  To be very clear, the parameters of both the APS pilot and the provider delivered services are the 
same. However, there will not be a service payment to APS employees. We will fund APS employers to deliver 
the service.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. In terms of the outreach payment, is that payment able to be utilised at the 
Playford  site?  
Ms Spanos :  The parameters will be the same.  
Senator CASH:   So the answer is yes , they would be able to ?  
Ms Spanos :  The answer is yes, it would be outreach.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of the qualifications of the APS staff involved in the provision of the service, 
are they the same as what is  going to be required of the providers?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes, correct.  Also, when you asked about one of the key differences before, there 's also a 
requirement in the request for tender that there is a mentor -to-parent ratio of one mentor to every 50 parents 
within the program.  That's a very big key difference from the last program , where there's no requirement. That 
requirement will also be in place for the APS pilot as well.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the salaries of the APS staff working in the pilot vers us, for example, someone 
working for an external provider, how are you looking  at parity between the two?  
Ms Spanos :  We have not made any requirements for providers to pay staff a particular amount or wage . We 
have required select qualifications . I would probably have to take on notice what  the staffing composition is of the 
APS pilot. It  hasn't been finalised yet , so I would probably need to take that on notice to provide you with detail  
rather than speculating any further.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the funding and servicing models for the broader service tendered to the external 
providers and the insourced government pilot in Playford, are they identical?  
Ms Spanos :  Is what identical, sorry?  
Senator CASH:   The funding and servicing models.  
Ms Spanos :  For example, the parents will have access to the same individual  pooled funding —is that what 
you're talking about?  
Senator CASH:   No. Are they basically identical, other than who is providing the service?  
Ms Spanos :  The service offer and the service model are identical.  Obviously, to be clear, as I said before, 
there will not be a service fee paid to the APS pilot.  
Senator CASH:   Understood . In terms of the pilot's performance, is it Caesar assessing Caesar , or who will 
actually assess the pilot's performance? Will the department assess its own performance?  
Ms Robertson :  We're still working through the  performance criteria and KPIs. But the parameters that we 
would be looking at to  assess a provider site , we would also be looking to apply those to the APS pilot site.  
Senator CASH:   Openly and transparently?  There for all to see?  
Ms Robertson :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   Would  the pilot then be subject to the same conditions for underperformance as other 
providers?  
Ms Rishniw :  We would be looking to assess like with like , in terms of comparing the APS pilot with the other 
service delivery . In terms of who does that assessment and evaluation , we would expect that to be very clear and 
transparent and part of our performance measurement . We will be holding ourselves to the same standard.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the pilot being subject to the same conditions for underperformance as other 
providers, is the answer that yes, it will be?  
Ms Rishniw :  We would hope that we would not be underperforming in the APS pilot.  
Senator CASH:   No, but in the event that it does — 
Ms Rishniw :  We would identify — 
Senator CASH:   It is identical, so there is parity across that.  Is a parent in Playford able to be serviced by an 
external provider servicing other areas in Adelaide , if they did not want to be part of an APS provided service but 
they still want to participate in the service?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 111 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Spanos :  The short answer is yes. I don't have the exact detail right in front of me right now, but I do think 
there is a similar allowance for all parents across the program. I'd probably just have to take on notice exactly how 
that would work, but that is a question we've asked ourselves across the whole program.  
Senator CASH:   When you say that there's something similar across the — 
Ms Spanos :  I'm just trying to find the right information, but, at a high level, there will be referrals from 
Services Australia. There are several ways you can enter the program. I'll start from the beginning. If you are 
referred in, you'll be referred by Services Australia if you're on income support to the provider within your 
location. But, if you choose to, you can be serviced by a provider in a different location, particularly if you're not 
on income support. You may be entering the program through other means or other referral mechanisms. So the 
short answer is yes. The longer answer is, 'Yes, that looks like it applies broadly across the program.' I'm sorry 
that it took me a while to get there, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   No, you've done incredibly well tonight. You really have. In terms of the new ParentsNext 
program itself, how many bids for tender have been received?  
Ms Spanos :  Any information relating to the tender process can not be disclosed until the valuation process has 
been completed and the delegate has approved the outcome. In short, I can not tell you.  
Senator CASH:   When is that to be?  
Ms Rishniw :  We're in the process of assessment now.  For that  assessment, we can give you an in dicat ive 
time, but I can't give you an exact time. It will depend on how the assessment goes  and w hether we need to get 
any further information as part of that.  
Senator CASH:   What's the indicative timeframe in terms of when we can start accessing that information?  
Ms Spanos :  The timeframe we've outlined in the request for tender is that we are expecting successful 
tenderers to be informed and announced in September to October. That wo uld be the date that that  information 
would be available.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the fact  that it's now a voluntary program, what activities exactly will participants 
be undertaking?  Just on Playford, while you're looking at that, how many people do you expect will participate in 
the Playford program?  
Ms Spanos :  We did do an estimation. I'd probably have to take the exact number on notice. I think my initial 
thinking might be too broad.  
In terms of activities, successful tenderers will be required to perform the following activities . This is what the 
service offer looks like . The first is a parent snapshot, in which they undertake an  assessment to assist the parent 
to identify their strengths and existing skills , current needs and challenges. We also expect referrals of parents to 
local community and social services for support where appropriate. For example, this could include crisis 
accommodation , legal support, counselling , other professional services, health services  and drug and alcohol 
supports.  
We also expect financial support to assist parents in paying for transpo rtation costs so they can attend meetings 
with their mentor , access community services, attend educational training, access educational training 
opportunities  or purchase work related goods or services.  They will  assist with caring  and h elp parents access 
early childhood education and care. They will undertake a  goal plan within our departmental IT system to help 
parents understand their strengths and non -vocational challenges, as well as their needs. They will also provide 
career guidance to help parents wishing to develop their career. They will also help the parents establish 
educational training goals aligned to their strengths and local labour market opportunities and connect parents to 
educational training.  
Employment is another activity. They will a ssist parents who are ready to start looking for  employment to 
obtain and retain suitable secure employment. That could  be through resume development ; post -placement 
support;  financial assistance , which I talked through before around  transportation ; transitional support for parents 
moving into employment services ; and assistance for parents to access wage subsidy and relocation assistance.  
They're  some of the key activities.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to provide the committee with that document or table the document so we can 
see exactly what the activities are  et cetera ? 
Ms Rishniw :  It's the request for tender. Perhaps rather than tabling the version that Ms Spanos has with all her 
notes on it, we'll make sure that the committee has the link to the request.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 112 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That would be great. Regarding  engagement support vouchers , in March of this year I 
understand that engagement support vouchers were introduced. Is my understanding correct  that these are given to 
participants following  their attendance at a face -to-face appointment and they're capped at $250 per participant?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes. That's correct. Are you  talking about the engage ment  support payments that we launched on 
11 March within the current program ? 
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Spanos :  There  are two types of engagement support vouchers. You're correct  that they're capped at $250 
per participant. There's the initial engagement support voucher. That's a single voucher valued at a hundred 
dollars , which can be issued once a client has commenced. The ongoing engagement support voucher  is a single 
voucher valued at $50 which can be issued at a participant's ongoing appointment. To be clear, those vouchers are 
paid out of the participation fund.  
Senator CASH:   Will they be available in the new program?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes. That is c orrect.  
Senator CASH:   Is it only for ParentsNext participants?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes. Parents participating in the Parents Next program. To be clear, t hey'll be available in the new 
replacement program  and they'll be funded out of the individual pool.  
Senator CASH:   If I am a new client  and I'm offered the engagement support voucher valued at a hundred 
dollars , what can I do with the hundred dollars . What do I get for the hundred dollars ? 
Ms Spanos :  You can get a voucher for food or fuel. We do have guidelines around these.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to table the guidelines?  
Ms Spanos :  Yes. I think t hat might be the best way to do that. 
Senator CASH:   Yes, t hat would be the easiest way to do it. Can you also table the guidelines  for the 
engagement support voucher ? How many have been given out to date?  
Ms Spanos :  I don't currently have those figures because the voucher only came into effect 11 March  and a ll 
our data is 31 March. I will take that on notice and provide you with the most up to date figures.  
Senator CASH:   Did the department engage in any  consultation with  employment service providers in relation 
to introducing the vouchers?  
Ms Spanos :  Those vouchers were based on the consultations that had be en undertaken in the development of 
the new replacement program. It really is a voucher that's designed to recognise a parent's time and effort to make 
it in to engage, particularly face to face. While we didn't negotiate that directly with providers, I believe it was 
welcomed because there'd  been discussions with the department about how we could  best ensure that people 
continue d to engage in the program.  
Senator CASH:   Are you able to outline the process of how providers obtain the vouchers for participants  and 
then how they're acquitted  et cetera ?  
Ms Rishniw :  Why don't we take on notice the process? What I understand you're asking is: h ow do the 
providers access the vouchers , how do they distribute them and how do they acquit for them?  
Senator CASH:   Would I have to ask for it as the participant or does the provider say to me , 'You are now able 
to access a $100 engagement support voucher .' 
Ms Spanos :  I think the best way would be to table the guidelines and give them to you  because I think t hat 
outlines all th ose parameters and provides clear guidance to providers  on how they are to utilise them .  
Ms Rishniw :  My recollection of both the consultation that we did in designing the new program, particularly 
with the parents advisory groups  and with various service providers, the notion of an engagement voucher was 
very much  welcome and part of that consultation.  
Senator CASH:   Has any additional support been given by the department to the providers, for example 
administrative support  to administer the vouchers?  
Ms Spanos :  No. 
CHAIR:   I've got a few questions to ask regarding  the Digital Services Contact Centre.  
Ms Spanos :  Sorry, are we finalised on — 
Senator CASH:   No; I still have six or seven questions on this particular topic,  and then I'll move to digital 
services as well.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 113 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Rishniw :  On the Digital Services Contact Centre ? 
CHAIR:   Yes. In the recent budget the government announced increased resources for the Digital Services 
Contact Centre . Can you tell us more about those measures and how much funding has been committed, and what 
it'll be used for?  
Ms Rishniw :  In the recent budget the government announced an additional $68.6 million over five years to 
support the Digital Services Contact Centre . That's additional funding on top of what it already has as its ongoing 
appropriation. It's very much going to be used for frontline service delivery in that digital contact centre. It's direct 
stuff, employment costs and servicing, to make sure —I mentioned earlier  that our digital contact centre has had a 
great reaction. We are servicing clients from a range of areas  and we've had inbound calls increase as we've rolled 
out that service ; they've increased by 77 per cent between July and December 2023.  
CHAIR:   Just go through the need for the funding and how many more calls were expected to occur . Have 
there been more calls?  
Ms Catelli :  There  have  been more calls generally. We have seen an increase in calls primarily because a lot of 
participants really like that personal touch. When we envisaged the online serv ice—as we said, it is for more  job-
ready people to do that and self -manage , but a lot of them , quite understandably , do not navigate themselves well 
through the system. The additional ASL is to handle all th ose additional  calls we get and provide the service 
they're looking for.  
CHAIR:   How many more calls is the department receiving than was originally forecast? What was the 
forecast?  
Ms Rishniw :  I think we were originally forecasting  that about 1.4 per cent of the Workforce Australia Online 
service participants would contact the contact centre, thinking that the vast majority of the online participants 
would be  able to self -manage. We're finding that that's increased to  17 per cent of that online caseload —so 
certainly a marke d increase. The length of the calls and the richness of the conversation ha ve also increased 
beyond what we first anticipated.  
CHAIR:   That's v ery helpful. What would  the additional funding be used for more generally , and w hat was the 
additional staff for the department?  
Ms Catelli :  It is primarily to engage the staff . In terms of the numbers already for this financial year —so it's a 
budget measure that takes effect immediately —it's 34.51 ASL. For t he next financial y ear it is 130.51. For the 
2025-26 financial year it's 121.57 ASL.  
CHAIR:   Thank you. Good job. Well done.  
Senator CASH:   Turning back to the engagement support vouchers : you'll table the guidelines , which is 
greatly appreciated. Can I also confirm that you will  give me on notice how many vouchers have been given out 
and split between the two in terms of the $100 and the $50 , how many were claimed by new clients and how 
many were claimed by existing clients , and what the total dollar amount  is of the vouchers that have been given 
out since 11 March 2024 . Are there a ny limits to the number of vouchers a participant can claim in one  day?  
Ms Spanos :  That's an interesting question . 
Senator CASH:   Just i n terms of some of the feedback I've received — 
Ms Spanos :  You're asking if someone can go in three times — 
Senator CASH:   Correct . That is the feedback , that's exactly right —that s ome participants are coming in 
multiple times a day trying to claim multiple vouchers.  
Ms Spanos :  I have not received such reports but my expectation would be  that the onus would be on the 
parent and the provide r to manage that. That 's not the intent of the engagement voucher , and I would expect them 
to manage that  as required . But I have not heard of any instances of that.  
Senator CASH:   Would there be any guidelines around that in terms of how many times —you said  that in any 
event there is a cap of $250 , and if you 're a new client $100 of that goes straightaway and then there 's $150 left.  
Ms Spanos :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   So once you 've hit the cap, is that it?  
Ms Spanos :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   There 's no resetting of the ca p after a period of time?  
Ms Spanos :  Not at this stage, no.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 114 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   On notice, c an you have a look if there are any guidelines around how m any time s or in what 
period of time you 're able to access ? In this case it would be the $50 engagement support voucher . 
Ms Spanos :  I will. But , to be clear, I would have an expectation that a provider would not enable someone to 
walk in four times in one  day to max out the $250 cap.  
Ms Rishniw :  One is an initial engagement voucher and the other is  an ongoing engagement voucher.  
Senator CASH:   Which is th e $50 —the ongoing  one. And i f you 've already had the $100 you 're only going to  
be able to get three an d then hit your $ 250 in any event. Is there a list of stores the participants can go to once 
they've got their vouchers? Is it a cash voucher ? How does it work?  
Ms Spanos :  It's dependent on the voucher  and i t is dependent on a conversation with the provider and the 
parent. Again, the guidelines provide guidance to providers on that. I would ask that we provide that  to you on 
notice.  
Ms Rishniw :  My understanding is it can only be spent on goods, not converted into cash.  
Senator CASH:   That's what I was going to ask. So it can 't be converted into cash ; it's a dollar value. Can you 
give me an example of the type of store I could go to?  
Ms Spanos :  An example would be to purchase groceries or fuel.  
Senator CASH:   You'll also make sure we get any rules about which stores participants can claim the 
vouchers for ? 
Ms Spanos :  We will provide you with all those details.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you so much. Those are  my questions in relation to the engagement support vouchers. 
I have  a number of questions in relation to the online system.  
Ms Spanos :  Can I just clarify : when  going through the documentation, just to be clear , I misinformed you  on 
the outreach and engagement cap . I said $250,000 . It's actually $200,000 per employment region.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you for correcting that evidence. How many participants are currently in the online 
system?  
Ms Catelli :  As at 31 March there were 1 81,380  clients in Workforce Australia Online.  
Senator CASH:   And what 's the longest time a person has been in the system?  
Ms Catelli :  Previously , I think we said in a question on notice that the longest time was —as of 31 December 
is the latest I've got . Three people were in the online service for 3 ½ years or more.  
Senator CASH:   Just in relation to those three people : what 's actually happened to them? It's not ideal that 
they're  in the online system for 3 ½ years or more. Now you 've identified there are people, what has happened to 
them and what do you do with them?  
Ms Catelli :  There are usually a series of factors that keep people in the re beyond the ir maximum time. For 
those three, it would have been transitioned. Prior to Workforce Australia Online , we had what was called the 
new employment services trial , and we also had the online employment service. These people likely would have 
started in one of those particular systems there as well. Along their particular journey, when we do have a 
particular person paused in  service —so there might have been an exemption that they don't have to meet their 
mutual obligation —that period of time often gets extended. They can stay in the service while that's going on. 
Also sometimes, and we have discovered this through our digital services contact centre, a person will say, 
'Actually, I am struggling, ' and they might need an assessment to go to a disability employment service. They 're 
waiting for that. I haven't got the details specifically on those three , but it's  usually the combination of one or 
more of those factors.  
Senator CASH:   Since 1 July 2022 how many participants have entered the system?  
Dr O'Rance :  I'll take that one. The total number of individuals who have been referred to Workforce 
Australia Online since July 2022 is 597,740.  
Senator CASH:   With a total currently of 181,380 in the system?  
Dr O'Rance :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Since 1 July 2022, how many participants have found employment and consequently exited 
the system?  
Dr O'Rance :  For the online case load , we don't capture employment outcomes . As you'd recall , those are 
recorded by providers. The proxy measure we would use —we don't record the administrative job placement. The 
best measurement we would have the re would be from our post -program monitoring survey . That data is Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 115 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  published on the department's website. We were able to report for different demographics what percentage of 
people are employed after exiting the online service.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you track whether the person is off benefits, though? If they're engaged in 
online it's because they're unemployed —is that right?  
Dr O'Rance :  Because they're receiving income support.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Isn't there some sort of measurement when they get off income support?  
Dr O'Rance :  We can provide that. I don't have that on me, but we can separately provide — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's not a regular thing that you track?  
Ms Catelli :  I do have a performance measure that we do publish online. The proportion of clients in work or 
study three months after exiting the online service is 78.7 per cent.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of those who've exited the system, do you track on average how long it took them to 
find employment via what monitoring you do do?  
Ms Catelli :  I'd have to take that on notice. I'm not sure of the exact details on that. 
Senator CASH:   That's fine.  Again —and we will use the data  to 1 July 2022, when this system commenced —
how many participants have returned to the system within three to six months of exiting?  
Ms Catelli :  That is one of our performance measures for the online service, but we actually don't have that 
data available at the moment, as the measure was a 12 -month rolling assessment. We're hoping to have that early 
next year.  
Senator CASH:   Would you have the data from 1 July 2022 to 1 July 2023?  
Ms Catelli :  Unfortunately not.  
Senator CASH:   Could you take it on notice?  
Ms Catelli :  I can take it on notice.  
Senator CASH:   You don't not have the data; you just don't have it here. That's okay. Would you have any 
data for participants who have returned within the 12 -month period?  
Ms Catelli :  Again, we would have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   How many participants have been through the online system and then exited to provider 
services —in this case, following completion of their allotted time in online services ? 
Ms Catelli :  The total number between 1 July 2022 and 31 March 2024 is 47,125 clients who have been 
referred after completing their maximum time.  
Senator CASH:   And their maximum time in this case?  
Ms Catelli :  There are two categories. The general category is 12 months. In that particular instance, we have 
36,465 in that category. Those that have declared that they're studying or working can stay there up to 18 months ; 
there's another 10,660.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can I ask a quick follow -up question?  
Senator CASH:   Jump in. I have to find a series of other questions.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What am I missing? Why are we not tracking employment outcomes from the online 
system?  
Ms Catelli :  As I said, we do have that proportion of work or study in three months after they do the online.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's by way of a survey?  
Ms Catelli :  That's correct.  
Dr O'Rance :  The employment outcome measures that you'd be familiar with for provider services are linked 
to provide r payment s. A provider will record a placement and then, if they call or apply for an outcome , because 
there are no payments to somebody to an equivalent  of the provider — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So the individual needs to self -report.  
Senator CASH:   Because they've exited the system ? 
Dr O'Rance :  Yes. There is no -one there to record information to track to see if they've got an outcome. We 
use different measures. We use off  income support and the survey as different ways of getting at employment. But 
we don't have the strict equivalent, because it would just be collecting administrative data where there are no 
direct benefits of the participant.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 116 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Two more questions and then I will turn to some other data. Since 1 July 2022, how many 
participants have been in the online system but have chosen to opt out of online services and into the provider 
services?  
Ms Woodall :  Between 4 July 2022 and 31 March 2024 there was 49,290 clients.  
Senator CASH:   That actually opted out and went into the provider services?  
Ms Woodall :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   How many people are expected to transition to provider services each month for the next 12 
months due to the completion of their allotted time in online employment services?  
Ms Woodall :  I'd have to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine. How many participants have their points target set at 100 for each reporting 
period?  
Dr Wright:   Of the 857,890 finalised reporting periods between January and March of this year , 17.2 per cent 
had a full target of 100 points.  
Senator CASH:   Does that mean that the balance then had a reduced target?  
Dr Wright:   Yes. Eighty -one per cent had a reduced target between 95 and five points , and  1.8 per cent had a 
nil target , reduced to zero points for the period.  
Senator CASH:   How do you get a zero target for the 1.8 per cent?  
Dr Wright:   That can be a range of factors. Generally when either a provider or the digital services contact 
centre assesses that, for that particular period, it's not appropriate for your circumstances. Examples could include 
if you were in drug and alcohol treatment, for instance , or if some other circumstance meant that an exemption 
was inappropriate but it also wasn't appropriate for you to meet your requirements for that month.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of the 81 per cent, the balance of the 17.2 per cent , taking out the 1.8 per cent 
that have been reduced to zero—just confirming : zero target is effectively no mutual obligation?  
Dr Wright:   Not necessarily. You might still have to go to an appointment with your employment services 
provider , for instance. You might have to  sign a job plan . But as a monthly requirement there is no job search . 
Senator CASH:   So there's no mutual obligation on a monthly basis?  
Dr Wright:   Mutual obligation is a broader term that refers to your PBAS, your job search and anything else 
you might be required to do , which would include a provider appointment or if you needed to sign a new job 
plan—for instance, if it was the period of activation. It 's probably a long way of saying 'usually '. 
Senator CASH:   In terms of the 82.8 per cent or around 81 per cent that ha ve a reduced target, that seems like 
a lot that have a reduced target. Who works out whether or not there is a reduced target?  
Dr Wright:   There are a range of mechanisms. There  are automatic credits applied if you are aged 55 and over , 
if you are a principal carer parent  or if you have an assessed partial capacity to work. There are also automatically 
applied labour market credits in some regions.  
Senator CASH:   What does that mean —labour market credits in some regions?  
Dr Wright:   Some regions have been assessed as having a relatively more difficult labour market. In those 
regions there's a 20 -point automatic reduction applied. Providers under the DSCC can also  assess  that in a 
particular region for a particular person , based on their circumstances their points target should be reduced 
further —for instance, if their skills are not very much in demand in a particular region or they have other barriers , 
like transport or similar.  
Senator CASH:   Of the 857,890, how many participants have had their points target reduced by 20 points due 
to the labour market disadvantage you've referred to? Can we get that statistic?  
Dr Wright:   We can take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. How many participants have had their points target reduced by 40 points , as you 
referred to, such as those with a partial capacity to work, principal carer parents or those aged 55 plus?  
Dr Wright:   Happy to take all those on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you  very much . Is there a points target setting 'no longer required '? 
Dr Wright:   Yes, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   What's that?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 117 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Dr Wright:   That would generally be where a person has spoken to their provider or the D SCC and is saying , 
'I can't meet my points for this period, for this reason '—again , not necessarily an exemption -appropriate reason 
but—'I'm having difficulty with my car , and I can't make it to apply for these jobs '—that sort of example.  
Senator CASH:   Is 'no longer required ' permanent?  
Dr Wright:   No, Senator . It's just for the period.  
Senator CASH:   What is the period defined as?  
Dr Wright:   Usually a points period is monthly.  
Senator CASH:   So you could get a ' no longer required ' for a monthly period?  
Dr Wright:   Just for that one-off. If you were talking to a provider and saying , 'I've had this circumstance that 
is going on , and I  am having difficulty meeting my points requirement, ' generally there 'd be a reduction if it was a 
very short -term circumstance. Only if they were unable to meet at all  would it be a no longer required.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   A medical situation or a death  or something.  
Dr Wright:   Normally a larger medical situation would result in exemption from requirements altogether. 
That's through Services Australia, that process. Similarly , death in a family can result in an exemption from 
requirements more broadly , again , assessed by Services Australia.  
Senator CASH:   Of the 81 per cent balance , 17.2 per cent of 8 57,890 have a points target set at 100 points for 
each reporting period. Is it possible to get a breakdown , 90 through to zero in 10 increments , as to how many 
people are at that particular points target?  
Dr Wright:   We can provide that.  
Ms Rishniw :  We can certainly provide that and take it on notice. One of the things that would need to be 
considered is their point in time.  
Senator CASH:   Just tell me what the point in time is , then. What would point in time look like? Is it for one 
month ? Is it for  a period of longer than that?  
Ms Rishniw :  Depend ing on the day that you identify , 'This is the day we're assessing who 's got which points 
balance, ' it would be that point in time . You might start your monthly balance at different periods of time, and 
you've often got 28 days to prove you have met your points requirements as well. We'll put relevant caveats 
around it. I want to be clear it won't be static . 
Senator CASH:   No, it'll be a figure that moves. How many participants have a re-engagement requirement?  
Dr Wright:   Generally a re-engagement requirement needs to be set if a person hasn't met a requirement. If a 
process flows through and a payment ends up being suspended , a re-engagement requirement must be set . We can 
take on notice some of the detail , but it  would  depend on whether they have valid reason or not  for not meeting 
the requirement  and the process there.  
Senator CASH:   I'll get you to take it on notice , because I know we're very short on time now. Also , in 
looking at  how many participants have had a re -engagement requirement , (a) how many didn't meet their points 
target  and (b)  how many didn't meet the minimum job search requirement? Very quickly , Workforce Australia 
Online , a similar set of questions . We're now onto the online component . How many participants have their points 
target set at 100 for each reporting period for the online component?  
Dr Wright:   I don't have the breakdown with me for the online provider servicing split for that one , but I can 
take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   How many participants , in the online caseload now, would have a reduced target?  
Ms James :  I think the data Dr Wright  gave you previously — 
Senator CASH:   The 857,890 ? 
Ms James :  It's not provided. I have no doubt we could give you a split , but we don't have that data to hand.  
Senator CASH:   Understood . I'll put a series of questions on notice then , and I'll split them so you know we're 
looking at those in the online system versus those with providers to make it easier to do that. Very briefly, the 
government announced in December 2023 they'd undertake service improvement trials for Workforce Australia 
Online to ensure employment services better meet the needs of the people who use them. Can you take me 
through where we are at with our service improvement trial?  
Mr Cunningham :  We've got a number of trials in that MYEFO measure , and I think we're still working 
through the design of most of them. We're getting close to the commencement . The first trial we expect around 
July this year.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 118 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   No trials have commenced yet. How many trials do we anticipate there will be?  
Mr Cunningham :  The MYEFO measure had five trials as part of that.  
Senator CASH:   When can we expect all of them to begin? You've referred to one beginning  in approximately 
July.  
Mr Beasley :  I think we're still working through the timing for the remaining trials. I think , as Mr Cunningham 
said, we're expecting to begin the first trial mid this year.  
Senator CASH:   Okay, take me through what the first trial is in relation to.  
Ms Kuttner :  The first trial that we have, which is due to commence on 1 July, is providing enhanced support 
for online participants. What we're looking to do is provide people who are on the digital case  load with the 
opportunity to access additional support, including career advice —helping  them to articulate what their career 
pathway might be and a plan to get there—and some other  advice around foundational types of elements and 
things that they choose . For example,  it could be helping them to draft their CV, to respond to position description 
criteria  or to practi se for an interview . It will all be strength based and driven by the participant.  
Senator CASH:   My understanding is the trials have been designed in partnership with the Australian Centre 
for Evaluation at Treasury — 
Ms Kuttner :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   and are subject to a robust ethical framework. What does 'robust ethical framework ' mean ? 
What does it entail?  
Ms Kuttner :  We have received ethics approval through the human rights ethics committee . It's an external 
process.  
Senator CASH:   Why d id we need that?  
Ms Kuttner :  Because these trials are randomised control trials and they involve people on a case  load, it's 
important that we have the ethical approval.  
Senator CASH:   How d id you go about seeking the ethical approval?  
Ms Kuttner :  We submitted an initial application in a procedure that the committee runs through an online 
platform. They  have a number of questions that are very extensive, and we submitted our responses. We had a 
couple of back -and-forth questions , and  we responded to further queries that the committee had. After  those, they 
provided us with approval.  
Ms Rishniw :  All of the trials are subject to external ethical approval in this way . We are dealing with people; 
we are dealing with people on income support, and we want  to make sure  they are absolute ly— 
Senator CASH:   Properly done —yes. You said the trials are randomised trials?  
Ms Kuttner :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. How will participants be notified that they've been selected for a trial?  
Ms Kuttner :  There are a number of ways for this particular trial. It will be — 
Senator CASH:   We're looking at this particular trial at this point?  
Ms Kuttner :  This particular trial, yes. It will be an opt -out trial. Participants will receive an initial notification 
in their inbox. There will be information on the website as well. They'll be able to opt out of the trial at any time 
or within the initial seven days. But , because of the participant -driven nature of this trial, if people choose not to 
book appointments then they won't receive the treatment.  
Senator CASH:   So I might be in the trial because I didn't opt out, but I don't have to actually participate?  
Ms Kuttner :  Correct. Participants will also be invited to an initial appointment after they receive the 
notification in their inbox, which will take them through the information about the trial. So it'll just be a little bit 
about what it is, how they can participate and how they might like to consider what order they would like to do 
their appointments in and different things like that. But if they choose not to attend that appointment — 
Senator CASH:   Nothing is held against them in the event — 
Ms Kuttner :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   You said there  are five trials in total that are going to be conducted , and we're currently 
talking about the one that should be up and running on 1 July. In terms of ensuring that you get a proper sample 
size, how many people do you expect will participate in the trials? What's the ideal level of participation to ensure 
you get an effective sample size?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 119 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Kuttner :  Each trial will have its own sample size.  For this trial, we've considered that we need around 
5,000 people in the treatment group in order to properly assess whether or not there are benefits to this enhanced 
support. But we're expecting to invite more than that number so that if we have people opt out we will still have a 
sufficient number of people that have participated in the trial itself.  
Senator CASH:   How will you determine how to invite people to participate in the trial?  
Ms Kuttner :  It will be random.  
Senator CASH:   Across the entire case  load?  
Ms Kuttner :  The online case load. It will be based on people who join the online case load, on new people 
into the service. After they join, within seven days, or within the first week or so of them joining —I can double -
check the dates if you like —they'll receive that invitation.  
Senator CASH:   So it could be an ongoing invitation?  
Ms Kuttner :  Recruitment for the trial will be over a couple of months. That will be where we are bringing 
people in and managing the staffing and resources of the contact centre to deliver.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the online cohort, will the trials be conducted across all cohorts of people who are 
currently supported through Workforce Australia Online?  
Ms Kuttner :  That's correct except for people under the age of 18. They won't be invited to participate.  
Senator CASH:   For people participating in the trials who are signed up to the employability skills training or 
career transition assistance programs, will there be any changes to the way these programs are delivered whilst the 
trial is being undertaken?  
Ms Kuttner :  No. To clarify, participants in the trial will need to have a job plan, so they 'll need to be in the 
online case load, but there 'll be no changes to any other requirements of being part of online services.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Recommendation 7 of the committee report recommended that a permanent 
traineeship position be established for each member of parliament. Is that under active consideration?  
Ms Rishniw :  Obviously the government is currently considering all the recommendations in the report and 
will respond in the coming months.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Has the minister sought any advice from you as to whether or not that could work or 
how it could work?  
Ms Rishniw :  We routinely brief the minister and keep him informed of development of the government 
response.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, in answers to questions  from, I think, Senator Allman -Payne , you said 
that—I don't want to verbal you; I just want to make sure I've understood it —the government supports the 
concept of mutual obligation s. Is that what you said?  
Senator Watt:   Correct.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In the for eword to the report the Chair, Mr Julian Hill, said in relation to mutual 
obligation s: 'The nature and extent of mutual obligations is like using a nuclear bomb to kill a mosquito. ' The 
report found  'the nature and extent of the current mutual obligations settings are counterproductive ' and: 
Mutual obligations as currently designed are excessive, tying the system up in red tape, driving employers away and having 
limited, if any benefit in terms of improving  LTU — 
long-term unemployed — 
jobseekers' capacity for social and economic participation or securing work. In too many cases, mutual obligations are 
actually making people less employable.  
Is this what you mean by the concept of mutual obligation s? 
Senator Watt:   What I 'm saying is that the government supports the concept or the principl e of mutual 
obligation s, but we also think that the way that that has been applied in a number of programs that were brought 
in by the former government doesn't achieve the ends that it was seeking to achieve and that the mutual obligation 
requirements  are overly punitive, don't necessarily help people into work and penalise people unfairly. So that's 
what we're working through: how do we retain the principle of mutual obligation but apply it in a way that's 
effective and not punitive?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you agree with Mr Hill in relation to mutual obligations being like using a 
nuclear bomb to  kill a mosquito?  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 120 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   The government's obviously going to prepare a response to that report, and it's probably 
premature for me to give a government view on anything in the report.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The Labor Party's National Platform says: 
Labor … recognises that current aspects of the mutual obligations system can be punitive — 
you said something similar just now — 
cause stress and anxiety, and be a barrier to attaining employment. Therefore, Labor will review the nature and extent of 
mutual obligations and develop a revised approach that provides the help people need and is based on trust and shared 
accountabilities for government, service providers and job seekers.  
Do you acknowledge that this statement , and also the statements made by Mr Hill in the report , cast some doubt 
on the principle of mutual obligation?  
Senator Watt:   No, I don't.  Again, it comes — 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It seems  like you 're want ing to water it down.  
Senator Watt:   No, we want to make it work  and we want to  make it not  punitive. To give you an example, as 
you would have seen , the budget did make some changes to mutual obligation rules. For example, there were 
changes made to 'better recognise individual s' circumstances with more appropriate mutual obligation rules ' 
applied for Australians in receipt of income support payments . We've committed to remove the arbitrary 13 -week 
time limit for temporary medical incapacity exemptions from mutual obligation requirements , with the duration to 
be based on advice from medical practitioners instead. I think that 's a sensible move to retain the concept of 
mutual obligation but apply it in a way that 's based on advice from medical practitioners rather than have some 
arbitrary period set by politicians.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can I ask the department : in relation to the budget measure on mutual obligations, 
what does the department consider 'more appropriate and consistent ' application of mutual obligation rules?  
Ms James :  With respect to the budget measures, the measures by and large relate to the Targeted Compliance 
Framework . That's  how mutual obligations are enforced , for want of a better word. Broader statements around 
mutual obligations are something that the broader setting  is considering as we consider the select committee's 
report. With respect to the budget measures, they are very focused on the application of the Targeted Compliance 
Framework rather than the concept of mutual obligations more generally as it exists in the legislation.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The budget paper refers to a ' more appropriate and consistent ' application of mutual 
obligation. Is there a specific program or measure?  
Ms James :  I think that the changes to the Targeted Compliance Framework are what 's referenced there. The 
changes themselves go to the application of that Targeted Compliance Framework , which is part of the mutual 
obligations framework, but it doesn't go to the core of what the obligations are, if that makes sense . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, that make sense.  
Ms James :  It goes to the side of the consequences of not meeting the obligations.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   There is a $0.3 million saving  per year. W here does that come from?  
Ms Rishniw :  Sorry, what number were you quoting?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I don't have the actual reference . Someone might be able to get it for me , but it 's in 
relation to the mutual obligations . I haven 't got the actual budget number. There is a saving of $ 0.3 million. If you 
haven 't got it there, I can put it on notice.  
Ms James :  If you put the reference on notice, that would be helpful . We've got so many bits of paper here , 
including,  of course , including the PBS . We wouldn't  want to lead you astray by not being clear which number 
we're looking at. So we 're happy to take it on notice . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay, we'll come back to that one.  
Senator CASH:   Very quickly, regarding the committee's report —the Julian Hill report —when can we expect 
a government response to it?  
Senator Watt:   I mentioned before —I think you were out of the room —that we will be providing a re sponse  
in the coming months , but— 
Senator CASH:   In the coming months?  
Senator Watt:   Yes, b ut we  did use the budget to start implementing some changes based on the report.  
Senator CASH:   On notice, is the department able to give me a table of what parts of the report the 
government has already started responding to by way of the budget measures?  I'll turn to recommendation 69:  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 121 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  The Committee recommends that the Australian Government implement trial arrangements to rebuild public sector 
understanding of and capacity to deliver high -quality services while broader reforms to the employment services system are 
progressed. These should include:  
• consideration  of the Commonwealth taking over the direct delivery of employment services in a small number of places, 
suggested to include the Australian Capital Territory; and  
• implementing arrangements whereby the Commonwealth partners with a service provider in target regions and for target 
cohorts, including to provide coordination and mapping supports and some direct delivery of services.  
Has the department had any discussions with the minister or the minister's office in relation to this 
recommendation?  
Ms Rishniw :  There are  a number of areas where the government is already trialling APS delivery , or partner 
delivery , with an employment service provider. For example, in Broome, we are partnering with an Aboriginal 
organisation to deliver employment services. In Yarrabah there are a number of employment facilitators under the 
local jobs program that are now APS employees. We're trialling  that. You mentioned the Playford trial earlier, 
with the new parenting program. We 're trialling these things in a considered and small -scale approach to be able 
to test , learn and look at where the right kind s of system settings  are. 
Senator CASH:   In terms of those trials, have  they all commence d since the report was handed down?  
Ms Rishniw :  No, some of them commenced prior to that —arrangements in Yarrabah, for example . I think 
Broome commenced while the report was being delivered . From memory —and I'll need to provide  exact dates on 
notice —certainly the draft response  came down  and we established and trialled the program in Broome . This 
budget has extended it for two years , to be able to properly evaluat e it. 
Senator CASH:   Is the government giving any consideration to bringing back a government -run 
Commonwealth employment service?  
Ms James :  I think we touched on this earlier. The government is considering the select committee's report as a 
whole, including this recommendation. That response is under consideration but is a matter for government.  
Senator CASH:   Albeit you've said , though, that  the government has already started responding to the report 
with some of the budget measures.  
Ms James :  We should note that this is also consistent with the employment white paper released by the 
Treasurer, which set out principles for employment services, including  'Enhancing APS stewardship of the 
national employment system '. This is the direction in which the government has signalled it wishes to go . We 
have had a number of opportunities, including the Yarrabah scenario , which  predates this government . Indeed , 
Workforce Australia online is Public Service delivery of employment services.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash, we are adjourning in two more minutes.  
Senator CASH:   Have any costings been done in relation to bringing back the Commonwealth employment 
service?  
Ms James :  No. 
Senator CASH:   I think Senator O'Sullivan needed a clarification . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Going back  to the saving I mentioned, of $0.3 million per year ongoing, i t's on page 
92. It refers to $6.4 million  over five years  to 'better recognise individual s' circumstances through more 
appropriate and consistent application of mutual obligation rules for certain recipients of income support 
payments '. What 's that measure for?  
Ms Huender :  I just found that as well. This is about better recognis ing individual circumstances . It meets  the 
new 13 -week temporary medical incapacity exemption —it includes that . It includes the alignment of carer 
allowance recipient s who provide daily ongoing care . They will  have access to the same recognition of their 
circumstances, including their reduced capacity to participate for mutual obligation purposes , as other people who 
have a reduced capacity , such as principal carers. It's the piece where  individuals can fully meet their mutual 
obligation requirements  through other activities , and this will be aligned.  There  will no longer be three different 
criteria to fully meet requirements , as there currently is.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In 15 second s, what's the saving?  
Ms Huender :  The saving is because there 's a reduction as a result of people  fully meeting and exiting provider 
services. There's a small saving there. There's an additional cost for Services Australia . So that nets out, at that 
point, $3 million.  Monday, 3 June 2024  Senate  Page 122 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  CHAIR:   That concludes today's hearing. Thank you to all witnesses who appeared , to Hansard and 
Broadcasting for their assistance and, of course, to the mighty secretariat. I remind senators  that written questions 
on notice are due  by close of business Thursday 20 June  2024. Answers to questions on notice will be  required to 
be returned by close of business on Thursday 1 August 2024.  
Committee adjourned at 22:00  