 
 
 
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA  
 
Official Committee Hansard  
 
SENATE  
 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  
 
 
Estimates  
 
 
Public  
 
 
WEDNESDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2023  
 
 
CANBERRA  
 
 
 
BY AUTHORITY OF THE SENATE  
  
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  
 
Wednesday, 25 October 2023  
 
 Members in attendance:  Senators Brockman, Cash, Davey, Faruqi, Grogan, O'Sullivan, Payman, David 
Pocock, Rice, Roberts and Sheldon  
 
 Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 1 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONS PORTFOLIO  
In Attendance  
Senator Watt, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Minister for Emergency Management  
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations  
Ms Natalie James, Secretary  
Corporate and Enabling Services  
Ms Deborah Jenkins, Deputy Secretary Corporate and Chief Operating Officer  
Mr Joseph (Ben) Sladic, First Assistant Secretary , Finance and Budget Division ; and Chief Financial Officer, 
Finance and Budget Division  
Mr Timothy Ffrench, First Assistant Secretary and Chief Risk Officer, Legal and Assurance Division  
Mr Scott Wallace, First Assistant Secretary and Chief Information Officer, Technology and Services Division  
Ms Giorgina Strangio, Acting First Assistant Secretary and Chief People Officer, People and Communications 
Division  
Mr Adam Shain, Acting First Assistant Secretary and Chief Digital Officer, Digital Services Division  
Ms Trish Lindh, Acting Assistant Secretary , Parliamentary and Governance Branch, Finance and Budget 
Division  
Mr Matthew Gilliland, Assistant Secretary , External Budgets, Strategy and Performance Branch, Finance and 
Budget Division  
Mr Anthony Howatson, Assistant Secretary , Finance Branch, Finance and Budget Division  
Ms Ingrid Nagy, Assistant Secretary , Communication and Media, People and Communication Division  
Ms Bridie Cosgriff, Assistant Secretary , Organisation Design Branch, People and Communication Division  
Employment and Workforce  
Ms Miranda Lauman, Acting Deputy Secretary  
Mr Jason Stott, First Assistant Secretary, Pacific Labour Operations Division  
Ms Felicity Rowe, Acting Assistant Secretary, Pacific Labour Operations Division  
Ms Stacey Lange, Acting Assistant Secretary, Pacific Labour Operations Division  
Ms Sue Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Pacific Labour Operations Division  
Ms Cary Duffy, Acting Assistant Secretary, Pacific Labour Operations Division  
Ms Benedikte Jensen, First Assistant Secretary, Planning for My Future Taskforce  
Ms Heike Phillips, Assistant Secretary, Planning for My Future Taskforce  
Ms Melissa Ryan, First Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Individuals  
Ms Fiona MacDonald, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Individuals  
Ms Quyen Tran, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Individuals  
Mr Alistair Beasley, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Mr Bruce Cunningham, Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Mrs Jodie Chamberlain, Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Ms Anna Ritson, Acting Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Dr Louise O'Rance, Assistant Secretary, Evidence and Assurance  
Ms Sharon Huender, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Mr Ken Bell, Acting Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Nadine Groney, Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Deborah Brown, Acting Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Abigail Kuttner, Assistant Secretary, Employment Policy and Analytics  
Ms Samantha Robertson, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Ms Anna Hemmings, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Mr Timothy Matthews, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 2 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Natasha Ryan, Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia Provider Support  
Ms Jodie Wearne, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Business  
Ms Eve Wisowaty, Assistant Secretary , Workforce Australia for Business  
Mr Stuart Watson, Assistant Secretary , Workforce Australia for Business  
Ms Anne Rozario, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workforce Australia for Business  
Skills and Training  
Ms Anna Faithfull, Deputy Secretary  
Mr George Thiveos, Senior Responsible Officer, Digital Projects and First Nations Division  
Ms Kathy Dennis, Assistant Secretary, Digital Projects and First Nations Division  
Ms Belinda Campbell, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Ms Carmen Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Mr Thomas Varendorff, Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Ms Alex Buckley, Acting Assistant Secretary, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Ms Laura Angus, First Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Ms Linda White, Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Mr Daniel Langer, Acting Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Mr Alec Wickerson, Acting Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Ms Jane Hayden, Assistant Secretary, Careers and International Skills Division  
Ms Vicki Wilkinson, First Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Dr Simon Booth, Chief Adviser, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Ms Beth Ross, Acting Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Ms Jo Rossiter, Acting Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Ms Carmel O'Regan, Assistant Secretary, National Skills Agreement Taskforce  
Ms Renae Houston, First Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Ms Rachel Livingston, Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Ms Katerina Lawler, Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Mr Chris Alach, Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Ms Natasha Platts, Acting Assistant Secretary, Industry Engagement and Quality Division  
Mr Matthew Hardy, First Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Ms Nisette Anderson, Acting Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Mr Chris Atkinson, Director, Apprenticeships and Foundation Skills Division  
Mrs Georgianna Duggan, Acting Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Mrs Jocelyn Ashford, Assistant Secretary, VET Data, Loans and Compliance Division  
Jobs and Skills Australia  
Mr David Turvey, Acting Commissioner  
Ms Kirsty Leslie, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workforce Futures  
Mr Clifton Bingham, Acting First Assistant Secretary, Labour Market and Migration  
Ms Angela Hope, Assistant Secretary, Domestic Skills Systems  
Ms Maria Shanahan, Acting Assistant Secretary, Enterprise and Systems  
Ms Joanna Reeve, Acting Assistant Secretary, Strategic Advice and Engagement  
Workplace Relations  
Mr Martin Hehir, Deputy Secretary  
Ms Jody Anderson, First Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Ms Angela Wallbank, Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Mr David Cains, Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 3 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr David Denney, Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Ms Elizabeth de  Hoog, Assistant Secretary, Safety and Industry Policy  
Mr Gregory Manning, First Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Ms Jennifer Wettinger, Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Mr Henry Jones, Acting Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Ms Tara Williams, Assistant Secretary, Employment Conditions  
Ms Alexandra Mathews, First Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards Policy  
Ms Danica Yanchenko, Acting Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards Policy  
Ms Helen McCormack, Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards Policy  
Mr Henry Carr, Assistant Secretary, Entitlements Safeguards Policy  
Ms Sarah Godden, Acting Chief Counsel, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Stephen Still, Assistant Secretary, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Stuart Kerr, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Michael Jurd, Acting Assistant Secretary, Workplace Relations Legal  
Mr Daniel Tracey, Director, Safety and Industry Policy  
Australian Skills Quality Authority  
Ms Saxon Rice, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Christina Bolger, Deputy Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Ty Emerson, Executive Director  
Ms Carmen Basilicata, Executive Director  
Ms Fiona O'Brien, Executive Director  
Ms Denise Carlus -Lowe, Executive Director  
Mr Warren Rushby, Chief Finance Officer  
Asbestos Safety and Eradication Agency  
Ms Justine Ross, Chief Executive Officer  
Coal Mining Industry (Long Service Leave Funding) Corporation  
Ms Darlene Perks, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Maryanne Fyfe, Head of Government Relations  
Comcare  
Mr Greg Vines, Chief Executive Officer  
Mr Michael Duke, General Manager , Scheme Management Group  
Dr Leanne Blackley, Chief Operating Officer  
Ms Louise Close, General Manager , Legal Group  
Mr Justin Napier, General Manager , Regulatory Operations Group  
Ms Megan Buick, General Manager , Strategic Partnerships and Engagement Group  
Ms Chlo e Eaton, Acting General Manager , Claims Management Group  
Ms Bev Smith, Senior Director , National Operations  
Fair Work Commission  
Mr Murray Furlong , General Manager  
Ms Joelle Leggett, Executive Director, Tribunal Support Branch  
Mr Jack Lambalk, Executive Director, Enabling Services Branch  
Ms Katharine Scarlett, Acting Executive Director, Client Services Delivery Branch  
Mr Patrick McCarthy, Executive Director, Communications, Legal and Organisations Branch  
Mr Chris Enright, Executive Director, Registered Organisations Services Branch  
Fair Work Ombudsman  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 4 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Anna Booth, Fair Work Ombudsman  
Mr Michael Campbell, Chief Operating Officer  
Ms Kristen Hannah, Deputy Fair Work Ombudsman, Policy and Communication  
Mr Mark Scully, Deputy Fair Work Ombudsman, Compliance and Enforcement  
Ms Rachel Volzke, Acting Deputy Fair Work Ombudsman, Large Corporates and Industrial Compliance  
Ms Gabrielle Lewis, Acting Chief Counsel  
Mr Steven Ronson, Executive Director , Enforcement  
Ms Kate Anderson, Acting Executive Director , Industrial Compliance  
Mr Anthony Fogarty, Executive Director , Policy  
Ms Phoebe Nicholas, Executive Director , Legal Compliance and Enforcement  
Safe Work Australia  
Ms Michelle Baxter PSM, Chief Executive Officer  
Ms Amanda Johnston, Deputy Chief Executive Officer  
Dr Rebecca Newton, Branch Manager , Chemicals and Occupational Hygiene Policy  
Ms Meredith Bryant, Branch Manager , Evidence, Communication and Industries Policy  
Ms Sarah Costelloe, Branch Manager , WHS Framework and Workers' Compensation Policy  
Committee met at 09:00  
CHAIR (Senator Sheldon ):  I declare open this hearing of the Education and Employment Legislation 
Committee into the 2023 -24 supplementary budget estimates. I begin by acknowledging the traditional custodians 
of the land on which we meet today and pay my respects to their elders , past and present. I extend that respect to 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people here today.  
The committee has resolved that written questions on notice should be received from senators by close of 
business on Wednesday 8 November 2023. The committee has fixed Friday 15 December 2023 as the date for the 
return of answers to questions taken on notice.  The committee proceedings today will begin with corporate and 
general matters of the Employment and Workplace Relations portfolio. Under standing order 26, the committee 
must take all evidence in public session. This includes answer s to questions on notice. I remind all witnesses that, 
in giving evidence to the committee, they are protected by parliamentary privilege. It is unlawful for anyone to 
threaten or disadvantage a witness on account of evidence given to a committee, and such action may be treated 
by the Senate as a contempt. It is also a contempt to give false or misleading evidence.  
The Senate has endorsed the following test of relevance for questions at estimates hearings. Any questions 
going to the operations or financial positions of the departments and agencies which are seeking funds in 
estimates are relevant questions for the purpose of estimates hearings. I remind officers that the Senate has 
resolved that there are no areas in connection with the expenditure of public funds where any person has the 
discretion to withhold details or explanations from the parliament or its committees unless the parliament has 
expressly provided otherwise. The Senate has also resolved that an officer of a department of the Commonwealth 
shall not be asked to give opinions on matters of policy and shall be given reasonable opportunity to refer 
questions asked of the officer to superior officers or to a minister. This resolution does not preclude questions 
asking for explanations of policies or factual questions about when and how policies were adopted. Witnesses are 
reminded of the Senate order specifying the process by which a claim of public interest immunity should be 
raised. I incorporate the public immunity statement into the Hansard .  
The extract read as follows   
Public interest immunity claims  
That the Senate   
(a) notes that ministers and officers have continued to refuse to provide information to Senate committees without properly 
raising claims of public interest immunity as required by past resolutions of the Senate;  
(b) reaffirms the principles of past resolutions of the Senate by this order, to provide ministers and officers with guidance  
as to the proper process for raising public interest immunity claims and to consolidate those past resolutions of the Senate;  
(c) orders that the following operate as an order of continuing effect:  
(1) If:  
(a) a Senate committee, or a senator in the course of proceedings of a committee, requests information or a document 
from a Commonwealth department or agency; and  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 5 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  (b) an officer of the department or agency to whom the request is directed believes that it may not be in the public 
interest to disclose the information or document to the committee, the officer shall state to the committee the ground on whi ch 
the officer believes that it may not be in the public interest to disclose the information or document to the committee, and 
specify the harm to the public interest that could result from the disclosure of the information or document.  
(2) If, after receiving the officer 's statement under paragraph (1), the committee or the senator requests the officer to 
refer the question of the disclosure of the information or document to a responsible minister, the officer shall refer that 
question to the minister.  
(3) If a minister, on a reference by an officer under paragraph (2), concludes that it would not be in the public interest to 
disclose the information or document to the committee, the minister shall provide to the committee a statement of the ground 
for that conclusion, specifying the harm to the public interest that could result from the disclosure of the information or 
document.  
(4) A minister, in a statement under paragraph (3), shall indicate whether the harm to the public interest that could result 
from the disclosure of the information or document to the committee could result only from the publication of the information  
or document by the committee, or could result, equally or in part, from the disclosure of the information or document to the 
committee as in camera evidence.  
(5) If, after considering a statement by a minister provided under paragraph (3), the committee concludes that the 
statement does not sufficiently justify the withholding of the information or document from the committee, the committee 
shall report the matter to the Senate.  
(6) A decision by a committee not to report a matter to the Senate under paragraph (5) does not prevent a senator from 
raising the matter in the Senate in accordance with other procedures of the Senate.  
(7) A statement that information or a document is not published, or is confidential, or consists of advice to, or internal 
deliberations of, government, in the absence of specification of the harm to the public interest that could result from the 
disclosure of the information or document, is not a statement that meets the requirements of paragraph (1) or (4).  
(8) If a minister concludes that a statement under paragraph (3) should more appropriately be made by the head of an 
agency, by reason of the independence of that agency from ministerial direction or control, the minister shall inform the 
committee of that conclusion and the reason for that conclusion, and shall refer the matter to the head of the agency, who sh all 
then be required to provide a statement in accordance with paragraph (3).  
(d) requires the Procedure Committee to review the operation of this order and report to the Senate by 20 August 2009.  
(13 May 2009 J.1941)  
(Extract, Senate Standing Orders)  
CHAIR:   I remind all senators that, as we continue our work implementing the Set the standard  report, as chair 
I'll ensure the proceedings are conducted in an orderly, respectful and courteous way.  
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations  
[09:03]  
CHAIR:   I now welcome Senator the Hon. Murray Watt , Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and 
Minister  for Emergency Management, representing the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. I also 
welcome Ms Natalie James, Secretary of the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations. Minister 
Watt, would you like to make an opening statement ? 
Senator Watt:   No. I'm okay, thanks, Chair. Good morning, everyone.  
CHAIR:   Ms James, would you like to make an opening statement?  
Ms James :  Good morning, everyone. There are just a couple of practical things I'd like to cover off. The first 
is some movements in senior staffing in the department since we last came together. Nathan Smyth has moved to 
another role, and Tania Rishniw has commenced as Deputy Secretary, Employment and Workforce. However, she 
is on leave at the moment, and Miranda L auman is acting in her position and will be answering questi ons about 
employment later in the day. In our portfolio agencies, Anna Booth commenced as Fair Work Ombudsman on 1 
September 2023.  Emeritus Professor Peter Dawkins AO concluded his term as Acting Commissioner of Jobs and 
Skills Australia on 6 October 2023. David Turvey is currently acting commissioner and he'll be here tomorrow to 
answer questions in relation to Jobs and Skills Australia . I do thank Peter Dawkins for his extraordinary work in 
establishing the interim Jobs and Skills Australia and the work he 's done in a very short time , establishing its 
credibility and producing some very important pieces of work.  
On 13 October 2023 , Minister Burke announced Marie Bolan d had been appointed as Chief Executive Officer 
of Safe Work Australia . She will commence on 1 November 2023. Michelle Baxter will finish in this role on 30 
October 2023. Justine Ross, CEO of the Asbestos Safety and Eradication A gency , will also conclude her term on 
19 November. I thank them both for their service.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 6 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  The second thing I wanted to reference is that Senator O'Sullivan wrote to me on Wednesday 18 October , 
asking for the department to provide responses to a number of questions before noon yesterday . We have 
provided a response to Senator O'Sullivan's letter . We will table that now  for the benefit of the committee so that 
it's on the record. That is all.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Senator Cash will take most of the call , first up . I just want ed to say thank you for 
responding to that letter . It's really  helpful for us to get that information ahead of today , so I appreciate you 
getting that to us . I also thank you for your opening statement , which  clarifi ed a few things in terms of the 
organisational chart and changes. That's all noted. Thank you  very much.  
Senator CASH:   Minister, what is the government's position on wage underpayments?  
Senator Watt:   Wage underpayment should not occur in any circumstance. Where those wage underpayments 
are intentional, of course, we have legislation before the parliament to deal with that , and we would welcome your 
support for that legislation.  
Senator CASH:   Secretary, do you agree with the government's view?  
Ms James :  I do. 
Senator CASH:   Secretary, why is it important for all businesses to ensure that their employees are paid 
correctly?  
Ms James :  It's your legal obligation and it's the right thing to do by your people.  
Senator CASH:   It's a legal obligation and the right thing to do. Does this change based on the size of the 
business?  
Ms James :  No. 
Senator CASH:   Do you remember saying on 4 December 2018, when discussing underpayments with David 
Marin -Guzman in the Financial Review , and I'm happy to have the articles tabled, 'What really blew me away in 
my time as the Fair Work Ombudsman '  
CHAIR:   Senator, it would be helpful if we did table those  and for the witness as well, I'm sure.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine. I'll table all three.  
Senator Watt:   Senator Cash, could I add one further thing. You asked  about  the government's position . I 
guess the other obvious thing to say is that , where those underpayments are detected , they should be remedied at 
the first available opportunity.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. Ms James , I'll read the quote : 
What really blew me away in my time as FWO is the number of larger, established, profitable businesses getting it wrong . 
They may have been getting it wrong for a whole range of reasons, but at its heart complacency was behind [it]. 
Do you have th e article  of 4 December 2018 ? 
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   And do you recall that quote ? 
Ms James :  Yes, I have that in front of me.  
Senator CASH:   Do you consider the department to be a larger established organisation?  
Ms James :  We're a large organisation of some 3,000 staff. In terms of established , we were established via a 
machinery -of-government change on 1 July 2022 , so we 're not established . In terms of the arrangements for pay 
and conditions , they became a little bit more complex as a result of the machinery -of-government change. So I 
would not say that we 're a well -established organisation , but we are on the way to establishing ourselves post  the 
machinery -of-government change.  
Senator CASH:   Like so many businesses.  
Ms James :  Well, no, I would not agree with that.  
Senator CASH:   I will take you to an article on 4 June 2019 , which  you should have in front of you . 
Ms James :  If you could give me the headline  of that , that would be helpful.  
Senator CASH:   This is the one re  the underpayments again : 'Big companies put on notice about staff 
underpayments '. 
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   You said:  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 7 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Today , we see seeing oversights arise in a different and surprising cohort of businesses . Large, well-known operations    
      
These are not companies that would like to think of themselves as engaging in 'below the line'  conduct . 
Yet these companies have had to confess to 'serious payroll errors ', making 'incorrect assumptions ' about award or agreement 
applications. They have had to confess to having 'historically poor processes ' and 'wrongly engaging [workers ] on individual 
contracts rather than the relevant enterprise  agreement '. 
The a pologies have flown  thick and fast , as these  businesses have had to confess to  their employees and the community that 
they have underpaid employees    
That was basically in the context of the article and saying that it was important for organisations who did 
underpay their staff to own up to it. Do you stand by that statement?  
Ms James :  Yes. That's a statement I made a few years ago now  when I was a partner at Deloitte and I was 
helping a range of organisations address longstanding blatant underpayment of wages.  
Senator CASH:   Can you explain why it 's important for an organisation to be open and honest with the 
Australian public when an underpayment of staff is identified?  
Ms James :  I'm not sure that I would emphasise the Australian public. I would emphasise employees and 
regulatory obligations.  
Senator CASH:   Even if you are a department in the Australian government? You'd think transparency with 
Australian public is important?  
Ms James :  I think i n the case of the Australian government transparency is important. We are accountable to 
the parliament.  
Senator CASH:   And ultimately, I would have thought, to the taxpayer  and the Australian public . 
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Should organisations put out a media statement when they identify an underpayment 
problem?  
Ms James :  I wouldn 't agree with that statement.  
Senator CASH:   So they don 't need to. Who should they inform?  
Ms James :  There 's what the law requires and there's what they should do , which is a moral judgement. I 
would talk to what I would do and what I advise d clients to do when I was working at Deloitte , which is , if you 
identify underpayment of wages , it's important to understand what has happened and it's important to engage with 
your staff about that . At the appropriate time, I would suggest you should report to the relevant regulators  the 
Fair Work Ombudsman and/or the Australian tax office . Of course, there is no legal obligation to do so , but good 
practice is that you should do so , and I think we have in the Australian Public Service a direction from the 
Australian Public Service Commission about the circumstances in which we should be doing that  reporting to 
the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator CASH:   I would have thought  that, as the Department of Employment and  Workplace  Relations,  one 
would want to always lead by example. Would that be a fair comment?  
Ms James :  We would like to apply best practice , yes. 
Senator CASH:   Yes. Excellent work. I understand your evidence in response to my question to you  about 
whether  you consider the department to be a large  or established organisation  was that, yes, it is  larger  but that it 
is not  necessarily established , because  of machinery -of-government changes. Is what you're saying therefore  that, 
if there were  a restructure , a merger or an acquisition , it's okay to get it wrong until you get it right ? 
Ms James :  No, that's not what I said.  
Senator CASH:   So what were you saying , then? I'm just trying to translate this to  how it operates in the real 
world with businesses.  
Ms James :  My evidence is my evidence.  
Senator CASH:   Well, c ould you explain it , because I clearly don't understand it ? 
Ms James :  My evidence was in relation to our department   
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms James :  and a machinery -of-government change . 
Senator CASH:   Yes. Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 8 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James :  The regulation in relation to machinery -of-government changes in the Australian Public Service is 
quite distinct and different from the commercial world.  
Senator CASH:   I know that, but are you making a justification for the underpayment of staff , which we'll  get 
onto shortly?  
Ms James :  No, I was responding to your question about  established   
Senator CASH:   Okay. I just wanted to clear it up. I just wanted to make that clear. You also refer red to a 
moral judgement. What you mean by 'moral judgement '? 
Ms James :  I think there is what you're legally obliged to do and what is the right thing to do. As I said, for 
example, businesses are not legally obliged to report to the Fair Work Ombudsman about underpayments. There 
is no legal obligation to do that. I consider it to be the right thing to do from the point of view of corporate 
governance  and f rom the point of view of being a compliant organisation . Cooperation with regulators is certainly 
what I would consider to be the right thing to do . 
Senator CASH:   In terms of  the machinery -of-government change  that you referred to, these were obviously 
staff that were paid for a long time by the Australian Public Service . I'm assuming that didn't change . 
Ms James :  We're now talking about my staff?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, t he machinery of government change that you were referring to. Surely it 's not hard to 
swap that over after a machinery -of-government change . 
Ms James :  That's an excellent question.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you.  
Ms James :  When people move to a new and established department, the rules in the Public Service Act apply 
as follows. Most public service departments , I believe , have enterprise agreements. The agreements of the 
receiving department apply to those staff. There is a capacity under the Public Service Act , under section 24, to 
make a determination to vary , but only in a beneficial way , how those agreements apply. Let's say, for example, 
you're the department of education and you receive some people from the department of industry , and some of the 
people in the department of industry are paid more at certain classifications . Then a determination under section 
24 can be used to preserve those high er pay rates of the incoming staff , who will otherwise be covered by all other 
terms and conditions of the enterprise agreement.  
The situation is different when you create a brand -new entity. When you create a brand -new entity, people will 
move into that entity but none of the agreements that they bargained for , with the conditions that they're used to , 
apply . So you're effectively at ground zero. The r elevant industrial instrument is the  Australian Public Service 
Enterprise Award . 
Senator CASH:   Understood. Thank you.  
Ms James :  You are still able to make a section 24 determination . I am in a position , or the acting secretary in 
the case of my  department at the time was in a position , to make a section 24 determination that sets out terms and 
conditions applying to all  of the DEWR  staff. The st aff who came from the Department of Education , the 
Attorney -General's Department or  the Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade  all had enterprise agreements . 
They came  to DEWR. T he enterprise agreements no longer applied to them . The award applied to them. We did, 
in the case of Acting Secretary Smyth , make a section 24 determination to supplement the relevant Fair Work 
instrument , which is the award.  
The challenge here is that section 24(1A)  of the Public Service Act says that these determinations are 'of no 
effect to the extent that it would reduce the benefit to an APS employee of an individual term or condition ' under 
that award.  That means the determination is read alongside the award. It is not a better off overall test the way the 
agreements are; it is effectively every employee and every individual term and condition of employment.  
The creation of new entities as part of machinery -of-government changes  I don't know that it's that common. 
It is much more common in the Public Service when machinery -of-government changes happen that there is a 
receiving department  an established, Senator, as you said before, receiving department  that has an existing 
enterprise agreement. There are complexities that need to be worked through. They can take a while   
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms James :  you might be familiar with that  but you have a receiving enterprise agreement with the modern 
terms and conditions that were bargained for relatively recently. With a new entity that is not the case . That is the 
situation we found ourselves in with the creation of our department.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 9 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   So the effect of what you're saying then is that , in your case, complexity in relation to the 
relevant industrial award and payment systems can cause a wage underpayment ? 
Ms James :  That's not what I said, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   Then let's jump to : how did your wage underpayment occur?  
Ms James :  Our wage underpayment occurred because , in taking into account 24 (1A), which I've just outlined 
to you, the award   
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms James :  our intention , and in conferring with the Public Service Commission , was, as far as possible , to 
preserve the conditions that people bargained for under the ir previous agreement.  
Senator CASH:   So you had an intention is what you 're saying?  
Ms James :  That was absolutely the intention  and that's what was discussed with staff at the time.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, but  that didn't play out in reality.  
Ms James :  The challenge  was that we weren't able to do that with some terms and conditions because of the 
operation of section 24 (1A) . Let me emphasise : all staff continued to receive the ir enterprise agreement rate s of 
pay. 
Senator CASH:   I appreciate you emphasising it all, but the issue I have is you 're talking about complexity. It 
is incredibly complex.  
Ms James :  I am explaining the rules that apply in a machinery -of-government change when you have a new 
entity.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms James :  Which is not a very common situation.  
Senator CASH:   No, it's not.  
CHAIR:   Senator, Ms James is answering the question here.  
Ms James :  It's not a  very common situation , but that is the situation we found ourselves in. The particular 
term and condition that we weren't able to preserve was bandwidth . I think the bandwidth under most enterprise 
agreements in the Public Ser vice is 7 am to 7 pm  and people work flexibly within that 12 -hour time frame. Many 
staff are on flex  time, so they're working from home, they're working at work and they 're working within those 
hours , and they are ordinary hours.  
Under the award, the bandwidth is 8 am to 6 pm, so it's a reduced bandwidth. And people who are directed to 
work outside that bandwidth are entitled to overtime. We had a small cohort of people, primarily people who are 
working on our customer service line in the employment space, who do really important work. They are based in 
Brisbane and Adelaide; it has a couple of times zones there. They also cover Western Australia. Some of these 
people are rostered to work later than 6 pm. The bandwidth and many of the flexible working arrangements under 
the enterprise agreement s that previously applied, that everyone has been working under for some time, was not 
able to be preserved in relation to this particular cohort of people.  
Senator CASH:   Before I hand over the call, it 's challenging and confusing to apply workplace laws and 
awards even for the department.  
Ms James :  No, Senator.  
Senator CASH:   Well , then how did you get it wrong?  
Ms James :  Senator, I 'm saying   
Senator CASH:   It sounded pretty complex.  
CHAIR:   Can we let the secretary answer the question?  
Ms James :  I don't think it was a question ; I think it was a statement . I'm happy for you to own that statement, 
Senator   
Senator CASH:   Well , I think it is complex.  
Ms James :  but what I would say is that we had an unusual situation . It's not unheard of , but it was an unusual 
situation unique to the Public Serv ice. Machinery -of-government change ; new entity. We had about 20 days in 
which to craft this instrument. As we were working through and trying our best to preserve the terms and 
conditions that people had bargained for  and I should say, everyone has continued to receive those bargained for 
rates, but this is something that we did not properly understand and we should have . As soon as we identified it, Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 10 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  we escalated it. We sought advice and we 're continuing to seek legal advice. We 've conferred with a number of 
different lawyers and the Public Service Commission to help us work through this issue . We have back  paid 
impacted staff , and I might ask one of the many colleagues who have joined me at the table  thank you ! to just 
quickly note , for the sake of completion , that we communicated with our staff yesterday in relation to the outcome 
of this piece of work and that people will be receiving back  pay. 
Senator CASH:   They haven't received it yet?  
Ms James :  They'll be receiving it this week or next week?  
Ms Jenkins :  It has gone in the payroll , which the SDO pays, and that will be in bank accounts late tonight  or 
early tomorrow, depending on your bank account.  
Senator CASH:   I'll hand over the call . I've obviously got a whole lot to explore , based on what was just said , 
so I'll hand over the call and then I'm happy to come back.  
CHAIR:   Thanks very much. I have a quick question on this matter, and there may be some follow -up 
questions from my colleagues. Being an ex -union official I used to do wage inspections quite regularly , and most 
employers were  actually appreciative . Quite often I would find some error in the wage inspection , because we had 
more access as union officials,  and we would sort  it out. One of the advantages , when you did wage inspections in 
those days  right across employers, across industry sectors  was that quite a few of them  were appreciative 
because it meant we could make sure there was a fair playing field, that everyone was getting paid a fair rate of 
pay, fair competition . 
Just on th e question of this matter, mistakes are made. Just so I'm clear on the time line for the underpayments:  
this error goes back to 2017 , during the previous government  is that correct ? Or have I got that wrong?  
Ms James :  No, this was commenced with the machinery -of-government change. The new entity was created 
on 1 July 2022 and the determination was executed on  someone help me out ? 
CHAIR:   My apologies, I was googling something and I 've got the dates wrong . I'll come back to another 
question on that . It is regarding an underpayment matter in 2021 , so I will get a copy of that  article so that I can  
actually ask you about it.  
Ms James :  That was not on my watch.  
CHAIR:   That may be more helpful ! Before I let the opposition ask  their list of questions , I want to ask you, 
Minister:  last year the opposition claimed the secure jobs, better pa y bill would 'close down Australia '. Could the 
department  maybe the minister might wish to make some comments  please give us an update on key 
indicators such as industrial action, wages, jobs growth ? Minister, has Australia closed down?  
Senator Watt:   It looks pretty open to me, Senator Sheldon. I think it was Senator Cash who was   
Senator Cash interjecting   
Senator Watt:   You think Australia's closed? We're currently closed, are we?  
Senator CASH:   It depends on who you talk to  in terms of the impact . 
Senator Watt:   Because you did say that would happen.  
CHAIR:   If we can put the questions through the chair, that would be helpful.  
Senator Watt:   Every time I wake up , every morning , it feels pretty open  to me . Maybe you live in a closed 
world , I'm not sure , but Senator Cash did predict that Australia would be closed, that we'd go back to the Dark 
Ages, supermarket shelves were going to be bare, we  were going to have mass strikes. Senator Sheldon, you 
would be surprised to hear that Senator Cash's overblown rhetoric has been proven wrong. Australia was open the 
last time I looked. As I 've said before, I don't think we've reverted to the Dark Ages. No -one's running around 
wearing chain  mail at least not where I go.  Whenever I go to the supermarkets there's food and groceries on the 
shelves, unlike what Senator Cash predicted. Interestingly, the level of industrial action in Australia has actually 
fallen under this government.  
So the predictions of mass strikes from Senator Cash and her colleagues, again, are wrong. And of course 
wages have gone up as a result of these laws. We are seeing more jobs created. In fact I think the figures show 
that this government has created more jobs in its first 12 months than any new government in Australian history. 
We've begun closing the gender pay gap. As we say, there have been fewer disputes and we are seeing more 
bargaining. So I would encourage everyone, as this debate approaches around the new legislation, the closing 
loopholes bill, to take with the rain of salt what Senator Cash and her colleagues say about it, because every single 
thing she predicted would happen after the secure jobs, better pay bill was passed has not happened. That's Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 11 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  because she and her colleagues always go for overblown rhetoric rather than facts. But I'm sure the officials can 
fill you with the details of those facts.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Minister. I do note that the lights are still on around the country, and even in this 
building.  
Senator Watt:   They are.  
CHAIR:   Secretary, could you go through the details of where we are on industrial action, wages and job 
growth?  
Ms James :  I think normally we would respond to questions along those lines in the workplace relations  part of 
the hearing.  
CHAIR:   I am looking with bated breath for the figures.  
Senator Watt:   You can come back and have a second crack. I'm sure Senator Cash  would enjoy being 
reminded  of why she was wrong . You'll be reminding Australians that they are getting higher wages and more 
jobs.  
Unidentified speaker:   Can we talk about real wages in this?  
CHAIR:   Mr Manning is about to take me through . Thank you for  accommodating that, Ms James.  
Mr Manning :  In relation to industrial action since the secure jobs, better pay bill that we were talking about 
was introduced , in June quarter of 2023 there were 10,200  working days lost to industrial action , compared to 
128,100 over the June quarter 2022. I think the next one you asked about was employment. Employment is 2.9 
per cent above the level recorded a year ago . That increase in employment over the year was mostly driven by an 
increase in full -time jobs , although both full -time and part -time employment rose at very high rate s historically . 
As is well known, unemployment remains low at 3.6 per cent . That's v ery low by historical standards . I think you  
could even go back to the 1970s.  
The third thing you asked about , Chair,  was wages. The latest data from the wage -price index shows it 
increased by 3.6 per cent over the year to the June  2023 quarter. I think the next figures come out in November. 
The previous quarter , where it was 3.7 per cent over the year , was the largest annual growth rate since the 
September quarter 2012.  
CHAIR:   So, as the minister has outlined , the Dark Ages aren't upon us . We have actually got wages up, 
growth up and industrial action down.  It's a great combination.  
Senator GROGAN:   Could you give us a sense of how workplace agreements are having an impact  on wages, 
just to follow on from your previous?  
Mr Manning :  Awards have gone up quite a bit. Was it awards you wanted to hear about or enterprise 
agreements as well?  
Senator GROGAN:   You can give me both.  
Mr Manning :  On awards, as has been well understood, t he Fair Work Commission announced an increase of 
8.6 per cent for the national minimum wage in last year's annual wage review , which was the largest increase on 
record , and 5.75 per cent for modern award wages , which was  also the highest increase ever . That built on the 
2021 -22 figures of an increase of 5.2 per cent in the national minimum wage and an increase of 4.6 per cent  with 
a minimum $40 for awards . In relation to enterprise agreements , the latest averaged annualised wage increase for 
agreements for the June quarter 2023 was 3.8 per cent , which was the highest since the March quarter of 2012.  
Senator GROGAN:   So that's looking quite positive.  
Mr Manning :  It's the highest levels in just over a decade.  
Senator GROGAN:   Could you step out what has led to that growth?  
Mr Manning :  In terms of the annual wage review and the award wages that I just outlined , in both those cases 
in both those years the government advocated a position that the real wages of low -paid workers should not go 
backwards. I think that would have influenced that. Likewise with bargaining , I think the bargaining outcomes in 
the private sector are higher than they are for the public sector , although in both cases they 're the highest they 've 
been for quite some time.   
Senator GROGAN:   That's good to see. In terms of the secure jobs, better pay act , can you tell us if there has 
been any impact on gender outcomes?  
Mr Manning :  The gender pay gap is currently 13 per cent , which is the lowest it has ever been . I think it was 
14.1 per cent 12 months ago . I have touched on a few methods of setting pay , but clearly there are higher levels of Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 12 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  female workers who have their pay set by award , so those historically large increases I  have spoken about would 
go to that. There is also  I think we spoke about this in previous estimates  the interim decision in the wage 
valuation case in the aged care  sector of 15 per cent . Obviously that is a very highly feminised workforce as well. 
I think what contributes to it also is the fact that if you look at those increases in employment I spoke about 
before, there  are very historically  high levels of participation among women , including in full -time work . All of 
those would have played a role in terms of bringing that gender pay gap down to its lowest level , noting that it is 
still 13 per cent  if you look at ordinary full -time earnings.  
Senator GROGAN:   So it's on it s way down. Did the opposition support these measures when they were being 
passed  the gender pay gap issues?  
Mr Manning :  The secure jobs, better pay bill ? I'd have to ask the opposition. I assume they didn't support it.  
Senator CASH:   I think that's a question for the Minister, to be fair to the officials.  
Senator GROGAN:   Minister, we were just talking about the gender pay gap and how we 're seeing it come 
down following the legislation brought in by our government . I'm just wondering if the opposition supported 
lowering the gender pay gap?  
Senator Watt:   I think you will find that they did not.  
Senator CASH:   Correction . We may not have supported the legislation , because we thought   
Senator Watt:   So you didn't support the legislation.  
Senator CASH:   But to actually make a statement that we did not support lowering the gender pay gap is 
wrong, in particular given our record in government.  I'm happy for you to say we did not support the legislation.  
Senator Watt:   Okay, you did not support the legislation that was about fixing the gender pay gap.  
Senator CASH:   I'm not going to get into an argument with you , Senator  Watt . I just want to be clear   
CHAIR:   I shouldn't have let that answer go to a question  that Senator Cash was saying. I appreciate that she's 
now said it on the record  that they didn't support the legislation. We're appreciative of that. Senator Grogan, 
back to you.  
Senator GROGAN:   Confirming that the opposition did not support the legislation which gave us the lower 
gender pay gap, which is obviously great to see, and it's nice to hear that clarification.  
Senator Watt:   Yes. It was very helpful for Senator Cash to confirm that they did not vote for the legislation 
that was about closing the gender pay gap. The other thing that's important to note  because , if I remember , 
Senator Cash used to make lot s of claims in government about closing the gender pay gap  what she  always  
failed to mention was that the reason the gender pay gap was falling under the former government was that male 
wages were falling in relative terms. So the only way that the opposition had for closing the gender pay gap was 
actually to keep male wages lower . Of course, we're taking a different approach.  
Senator GROGAN:   So keeping wages lower in general was the intent of the opposition?  
Senator Watt:   Yes. I think we all remember that low wages was a deliberate design feature of the former 
government's economic plan , and, in contrast, higher wages is something that we 're aiming for , and we're 
beginning to deliver  it. 
Senator GROGAN:   It's good to hear those statistics this morning that do show us that there are some 
significant increases , which is great for the Australian people.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   This is more like q uestion time than  estimates , to be honest. We have the 
department here, and we've got a political pointscoring exercise between the major parties. Time is precious.  
Senator CASH:   Do I have the call now?  
CHAIR:   You now have the call. As the chair, people have the right to use the time that they have. Senator 
Pocock's made his observations. Thanks, Senator Pocock. I'm also very mindful that there are people that listen in 
to estimates from across the community. They may not listen to question time, so there is opportunity for people 
to ask questions but also for the general public to hear answers along with other commentators.  
Senator CASH:   Ms James, in relation to the underpayment by the department that we have been exploring, 
how many staff were underpaid in total? I know you said it was a small cohort , but what  is the  figure? How many 
staff were underpaid?  
Ms Jenkins :  I will respond to that one.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you, Ms Je nkins.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 13 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Jenkins :  We have 99 employees who are from the APS  3 to 6 classifications . A further breakdown of that  
is that 93 of those are current employees , and six of th ose are former employees . I'll give you a little more 
information. The average duration we 're talking about is 35 minutes . Just remember the bandwidth . We're  talking 
about a 7 to 7; we're talking about a 6 to 7  I'll get it the right way around. We are talking about current payments 
for each employee ranging in value from $8.89 to $4,051.07.  
Senator CASH:   So $4,051.07. Is that the bandwidth?  
Ms Jenkins :  That's the bandwidth.  
Senator CASH:   From the lowest through to the highest?  
Ms Jenkins :  Yes. That's the lowest through to the highest. I will also let you know the estimated net cost . 
Senator CASH:   Was that the net cost? I'm sorry, it's difficult to hear.  
Ms Jenkins :  The net cost. The amount that we are paying those employees is $60,099, close to $61,000. So 
that's $60,099.92. It's important that we apply i ndexation to that figure , which we have done . We have an 8.1 
simple indexation on that  one across the whole time. So we've actually applied  it across the whole amount . The 
indexation figure alone is $2 ,826.61. So the final estimated indexed cost of the analysis of what we have done so 
far is $62,926.52. I want to clarify  that the average index ed payment is $635 .25. Can I clarify that, to get it on the 
record, we use  the SDO  the service delivery office  to do our payroll , so those amounts have gone into payroll 
and are being processed today , and those employees will receive their payments in the payroll  that I believe is run  
today.  
Senator CASH:   Does that mean that it will be d elivered into their bank account today?  
Ms Jenkins :  Yes. It depends on who you bank with as to the timing of when it actually goes into the bank 
account. Let's make it simple  today or tomorrow . 
Senator CASH:   I want to go back to confirm some evidence that was given . I just want to confirm that I 
heard it correctly , and then  Ms Jenkins said something else , but I 'll put it to both of you. S ecretary,  I believe you  
stated this : 
We've conferred with a number of different lawyers and the Public Service Commission to help us work through this issue. 
We have backpaid impacted staff, and I might ask one of the many colleagues who have joined me at the table  thank you!  
to just quickly note, for the sake of completion, that we  can. 
I believe Ms Jenkins said, 'We communicated with our staff yesterday in relation to the outcome of the piece of 
work and people will be receiving back  pay.' To give you an opportunity  have they or have they not? Secretary, 
you said they had received the back  pay. I just want to confirm the evidence.  
Ms James :  I said they will be receiving back  pay and that it had been processed through the system.  
Senator CASH:   That's not how the transcript came up. It says, 'We have backpaid impacted staff.' So that 
wasn't the evidence. The evidence was you are processing the back  pay. When was the underpayment first 
brought to you r attention, Secretary?  
Ms James :  To my attention?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms James :  On 15 June 2023.  
Senator CASH:   On 15 June 2023?  
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   What was the period over which the employees were underpaid by the department?  
Ms James :  I might ask my colleague s to identify that.  
Ms Strangio :  The period that applies to these underpayments commenced on 7 July 2022   
Senator CASH:   And t hrough to?  
Ms Strangio :  The payment that we're making tomorrow applies to the  period from that date until  11 August 
2023.  
Senator CASH:   That's 11 August 2023. So i t was first brought to your attention, Secretary, on 15 June . Today 
is 25 October  July, August, September, October  so the average person has missed out on $6 35.25. In one case, 
it's over $4, 000 $4,051.07 . So that's  roughly 1 33 days. Why has it taken so long to get this money into people's 
bank accounts?  
Ms James :  Perhaps  I can explain what happened between 15 June and today.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 14 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Yes, that 's fine.  
Ms James :  When we discovered we had this issue, first , we had to work through and understand the legal 
situation. On 15 June 2023, I was advised that we may have a problem , so we looked at it internally. We then 
sought legal advice from the law firm who had drafted the determination for us. We also engaged an external 
provider to effectively do the calculations on our behalf.  
Senator CASH:   Could I ask who that external provider was?  
Ms James :  I might ask m y colleagues  to give the details.  
Ms Strangio :  That provider was Cobalt Consulting.   
Ms James :  They are one of our internal audit providers .  
Ms Strangio :  This was being done in parallel. The first step is always to understand what ha s happened and 
the extent of the problem  the situation. We established internal governance  to deal with this. So we established a 
steering committee . The executive board  has received , since this arose  every executive board  a report on an 
update o f how the project has been going . We established a project with proper project management around it. We 
established a number of principles to guide how we went about addressing this issue. One of those was to work to 
resolve the issue as quickly as possible, while ensuring accuracy and completeness. One was to act with integrity  
and to  be honest, accountable and transparent around what has happened. In that vein, we communicated with our 
staff about what had happened in early August, once we had got a sense of who was impacted.  
Senator CASH:   Just for my note taking,  you said you were made aware on 15 June, but you didn't advise the 
staff until when?  
Ms Jenkins :  On 11 August.  
Senator CASH:   So two months later.  
Ms James :  We were working through at that point . It's important to be transparent, but you need to know 
what it is that has happened. In that time, we had engaged with a second law firm, to get some further advice. We 
had engaged with the Public Service Commission and we were working through to ensure we understood 
impacted staff. So that's what we were doing over that period of time. After we notified staff, we had significant 
engagement with staff about the issue. A key piece here is , obviously , securing all the relevant records. As Ms 
Strangio noted before, the service delivery office holds our records. Because of the machinery -of-government 
change  and some other systems things, getting a hold of our own records for the full period wasn't as 
straightforward as we would have preferred. We needed to look at rosters. We needed to look at the pay records. I 
think we looked at flex sheets as well. So we were working through all that with our experts and with Cobalt 
Consulting.  That's what was going on in the period prior to staff communication. I might ask Ms Strangio to talk 
about the staff engagement, because, while we look at those records, we have to talk with staff about whether the 
records are right. For us, we were quite relieved that they mostly were. But , every step of the way , we do need to 
check with staff to make sure that the calculations we've done resemble what they understand and recall their 
work hours to be. I might ask  Ms Strangio to talk a little bit about what 's involved with that.  
Senator CASH:   I've now got a line of questioning in relation to  how you notified the staff , whether it was in 
writing , whether it was all staff across the department  et cetera.  Could you just bear that in mind when you're 
taking us through it?  
Ms Strangio :  Sure. On 11 August we notified all staff, through   
Senator CASH:   That's all staff in the department?  
Ms Strangio :  That's correct  everyone.  
Senator CASH:   Am I able to get a copy of that email?  
Ms Strangio :  Yes. That might be with the letter that was tabled earlier.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you.  
Ms Strangio :  We did write to all staff at that point and advised them of what we had determined had occurred 
at that point . We placed quite detailed information on the intranet about the circumstances that had occurred. Over 
the following couple of weeks, we held information sessions directly with those staff who were working in 
rostered environments and anyone else who wanted to attend, to talk through what had occurred. We set up a 
mailbox where we received inquiries directly, and those were all dealt with and addressed immediately. We were 
working with managers and supervisors of those couple of areas, so our contact centres and a couple of the 
smaller IT service desks that were in the mix. We worked directly with their managers to ensure that they 
understood what was happening , and we have kept them informed. We've had updates on our intranet. As Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 15 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  information was progressing, we were able to provide that. There was one  I think it was 6 October  that was 
prior to yesterday's   
Senator CASH:   What was that one?  
Ms Strangio :  That was an update on our intranet. This information is readily available to all employees at all 
times.  Once we were able to identify the 99 employees affected , we were then engaging directly with them once 
we had some calculations that we felt were valid and we had validated against all of the various pieces of 
information that Ms James mentioned earlier : flex sheets, rostered information  and pay data. We then 
communicated directly in writing  with those employees. That's after we had information sessions with them. We 
communicated directly with them in writing to provide them with our calculations , seek their views and consult 
with them on the calculations that we'd made to verify with them that we had indeed reflected that accurately.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the lawyers, the consultant et cetera, what was the total expenditure by the 
department in relation to the rectification?  
Ms Strangio :  We have $119,625 .47 on legal advice.  The data analysis is $ 75,866 .34. 
Senator CASH:   So it is around $200,000 , and the total amount to be back paid is $60,099. Secretary, when 
did you advise the relevant union?  
Ms James :  On 11 August we met with and advised the CPSU.  
Senator CASH:   So it was n ot when you were first made aware of it in June?  
Ms James :  On 11 August.  
Senator CASH:   So not in June? When did you advise Minister Burke or his office?  
Ms Strangio :  That was 25 July.  
Senator CASH:   So it was brought to your attention on 11 August , and you notified the minister on 25 July . 
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Okay. I will continue my line of questioning when I get the call back.  
CHAIR:   Senator Pocock.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   I've got some questions about PTSD diagnosis provisions . Who will be able to 
diagnose PTSD for the purposes of accessing a presumption ? 
Ms James :  We are in cross -portfolio. Workplace relations is next. I think we have the relevant people in the 
room , so I'm happy to bounce in and out if Senator Cash is in cross -portfolio  and other senators want to go  I 
don't think that 's normally how it's done , but we have the people here . 
Senator Watt:   Can we just check roughly how long you reckon you'll be in cross -portfolio , Senator Cash?  
Senator CASH:   Another hour?  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   I can come back if that 's what the committee wants.  
Ms James :  The relevant people are here.  
CHAIR:   If you're okay with it, we might as well do it while we're here.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Thank you.  
Ms James :  In the interest of time.  
Ms Godden :  Under the current workplace compensation arrangements for Commonwealth jurisdiction and 
under the proposed amendments in the closing loopholes bill, it is up to the relevant decision -maker to determine 
on the evidence available whether the person seeking compensation is suffering from post -traumatic stress 
disorder.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Does that narrow it down? M y understanding is that people in the ACT trying to 
access for PTSD need a diagnosis from a psychiatrist . There's a shortage of psychiatrists in the ACT and 
elsewhere in the country , which causes a real bottleneck. From looking at the legislation, I see the ACT workers 
comp system is governed by the Safety , Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, so I'm interested in which 
provisions enable the insurer to accept a diagnosis from a psychiatrist  only. 
Ms Godden :  That is essentially an administrative process that we understand was put in place by the relevant 
decision -makers. The decision -maker under normal administrative principles takes into account all relevant 
material , including, for example, a diagnosis by a psychiatrist. That relevant material may include other facts and 
evidence. We understand  I haven't seen any relevant administrative rules , so t his is just my understanding  that Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 16 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  in the ACT there 's an administrative requirement that the diagnosis be by a psychiatrist , but it's not a feature of the 
legislation . The way the legislation is framed, the decision -maker makes the decision.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Who are the relevant decision -makers under this act?  
Ms Godden :  I might get one of my colleagues to assist me there.  
Mr Jurd :  Under the SRC A ct at the moment , decision -makers are Comcare for the premium -paying portion 
of the SRC Act coverage and licensees for individual licensees within the jurisdiction.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   So Comcare get to  decide who can diagnose PTSD?  
Mr Jurd :  Comcare  will decide whether or not the claimant has PTSD, taking into account all the information 
that's provided to it , which can include a diagnosis.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Are there any guardrails about getting second, third  or fourth opinions if they 
don't like the diagnosis?  
Mr Jurd :  There is a limitation on the number of  there are guardrails  within the act. I'll  have to double -check 
exactly what they are . There is provision under the act to allow independent medical examinations , but that's 
limited by an instrument , which I have to double -check . 
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Sure. Under the changes , is there anything that suggests that it'll be broadened 
from psychiatrists to clinical psychologists and GPs given that they seem able to diagnose PTSD and they're often 
easier to get into?  
Mr Jurd :  Under the current bill? Under the presumptive provisions to be introduced by the bill , they provide 
a legislative presumption in circumstances where a person suffers from PTSD . For the purposes of that 
presumption, PTSD is to be defined by an instrument under the act which was intended to commence upon the 
commencement of the act . That hasn't been prepared yet ; that will be a ministerial declaration  under the bill . 
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Has that been drafted yet?  
Mr Jurd :  Not yet. I think that the way the bill is intended to operate is 28 days from the commencement of 
the bill to allow that instrument to be drafted.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Looking at the details , I see  it says that there is a presumption 'unless the 
contrary is established '. It doesn't go on to state the standard of proof required to establish the contrary. I'm 
interested in your understanding or whether you know the government's intention around this . What proof would 
be required to overturn a presumptio n? First responders are eager to have this , but are we saying it is just getting 
an independent medical examination, about which we know there are some serious questions about gaming the 
system . Is that enough for Comcare to say, 'Actually , go to this person who we prefer? ' 
Mr Jurd :  In my experience, it's not used in that way. I understand that, in practice , if a claimant provides 
sufficient evidence that they are suffering from a disease captured by the current presumptions , that will generally 
be taken into account unless the evidence suggests that there may be an alternative non -work -related factor that 's 
has contributed to it , in which case th at contrary provision can be explored.  
Ms J Anderson :  I know Comcare are also on later today. It may be useful for them to also explain the 
processes that they undertake. I know that they also have data about those acceptance levels . I understand  that, 
even under the current arrangement, acceptance levels for PTSD for first responders are quite high already. This 
is obviously making the process even smoother. They might be able to provide that data to you later today.  
Ms Godden :  The ACT jurisdiction  are a self -insurer now , so the decision -maker will be within the ACT 
rather than Comcare itself , but Comcare may be able to assist in relation to their processes.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   I'm certainly hearing from first responders that there are serious concerns about 
the way that independent medical examinations are used in order to not have a positive diagnosis , but I'll take that 
up with them later. It 's also been put to me that those working in front -line roles at Border Force and in our 
national security agencies are at a greater risk of developing PTSD. I imagine you've had a look at the Comcare 
data on this. Is there a move to include them in this presumptive legislation?  
Ms J Anderson :  Again, Comcare c ould take you through that data. Regarding the scope of the bill , the 
government has aligned that with the Senate Education and Employment References Committee report The 
people behind 000: mental health of our first responders . It is also align ed with a Safe Work  Australia report 
which was a revised list of deemed diseases in Australia . So the provisions are based on the evidence provided in 
those  two reports.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   So it does or it doesn't include Border Force?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 17 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Godden :  Currently , as drafted in the closing -loopholes bill, the presumptive provision would  not apply to 
Border Force employees.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   What about people in the call centre for the ambos? 
Ms Godden :  Call centre operators  I'm just trying to think of the specific definition that we used in 
consultation  would be covered.  
Mr Jurd :  To the extent that they fall within the emergency services communicat ions operators category , 
they'd be  captured  by the bill . 
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   On notice, j ust clarity whether they do or don't as currently drafted . Finally, I'm 
interested in whether volunteer first responders are covered by this bill.  
Ms Godden :  Volunteer firefighters will be covered by th is bill, but, for example, the bill covers the AFP 
employees, not volunteers.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   You referenced The people behind 000  and that this is a response to that. One of 
the things that that inquiry highlighted was the use of independent medical examiners and the serious concerns 
and issues there. If this is a response to that , how is that being addressed in this bill?  
Ms J Anderson :  In terms of the evidence provided , I think some of the concerns that you 've raised  that 
stakeholders were concerned  go to those administrative arrangements through the ACT government  rather than 
the bill itself , but we can certainly undertake to also raise those concerns with the ACT government.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   It's my understanding that The people behind 000 actually recommend ed that 
independent medical examinations be done away with or really  dialled back . There were  14 recommendations . 
One was  PTSD . What's the time line for the other 13? Has work been started on them?  
Ms J Anderson :  I might get my colleague  to answer that . There are a couple of different areas working on 
this one.  
Ms de Hoog:   In terms of the status of the report and those recommendations, I'd need to take that question on 
notice.  
Ms J Anderson:   I think they range across a number of departments   
Ms de Hoog:   Portfolios.  
Ms J Anderson:   portfolios, so we would have to take that on notice.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Maybe on notice  also tell me about  any work that has been started to respond to 
the other 13 recommendations. Finally, I 'm keen to get some clarification on an individual case that has been 
raised with me by a former firefighter who has been diagnosed with multiple myeloma 14 years after the start of 
their career. They are just shy of the 15 -year qualifying period which would have enabled them to qualify for the 
presumption , and without that it seems the ir claim has been rejected despite them being there for almost 15 years. 
This is one of the cancers that's been on the list for quite a while. There have been large changes to the diagnostic  
criteria for this cancer , and i t's being diagnosed much earlier now and not just the end -stage symptoms. I am 
interested in when the qualifying period for this cancer being 15 years was established.  
Mr Jurd :  We might have to take that one on notice.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Further to that,  on what basis was it set at 15 years , and has that been reviewed 
since it was establish ed? 
Ms J Anderson:   We will take that on notice as well.  
Senator DAVID POCOCK:   Also, how responsive are the  qualifying periods to the emerging evidence and 
changes in clinical practice? We saw that l ast year the list of cancers, particularly for women and some 
reproductive cancers , was greatly  expanded based on  recent science , so I'm interested in how this gets updated.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   I'll continue along my line of questioning in relation to the underpayment by the department 
of the 99 staff members. We were talking about when the minister was informed . Was that 25  July 2023?  
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   It was first brought to your attention, Ms James , on 15 June . That was wh en it was brought to 
your attention. When was it first identified?  
Ms James :  I will ask Ms Strang io to talk to that.  
Ms Strangio :  That would be  through  a query that the HR team received on 5 June.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 18 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James :  It's worth noting that the query was made by a manager looking at establishing some new 
arrangements , so the query did not come from one of our staff  members . The human resources team on receiving 
this query from the manager began looking at the issue promptly and began working through the question. It was 
not straightforward or black and white . If it had been,  we would not have had to hire lawyers and spend as much 
time working through it .  
Senator CASH:   I'm trying to work out how small business cope s. According to your evidence,  this was not 
found after a complaint  but was inadvertently found because of a query that was raised . 
Ms James :  That is how it was identified.  
Senator CASH:   So but for the query there may still be underpayment occurring?  
Ms James :  I am not going to engage in hypotheticals.  
Senator CASH:   You said that a query was raised , so the underpayment itself was not raised . It was raised as a 
result of a query in relation to another matter , and it was found. Why did it take so long for you to notify the 
minister , given in particular the minister's views on wage theft and wage underpayment?  
Ms James :  I consider I notified the minister at the appropriate time , which was when I had some degree of 
certainty about what the situation was.  
Senator CASH:   What was the minister's response? Did he request a briefing?  
Ms James :  No, the minister did not request a briefing. We talked through the issues and endeavoured to keep 
him informed . 
Senator CASH:   When you say 'endeavoured  to keep him informed' , in what manner?  
Ms James :  By 25 July we were thinking that quite soon we would be in a position to go to our staff , and so 
that was the basis of my communication with him. We went to staff when we had a degree of an understanding  or 
a much clearer understanding of who had been impacted and the nature of the issue . It was at that point that I 
raised the issue with Minister Burke and also advise d him that we would be expecting to communicate with staff  
soon , that we would be talking with the CPSU as well  and that we were talking through what was involved . We 
were also aware at that point that we were approaching the point where we would talk to the Fair Work 
Ombudsman , and so it was at that point I considered it appropriate to advise the minister.  
Senator CASH:   It took over a month to advise the minister. Did you say the minister did not request a 
briefing?  
Ms James :  We didn't provide a written briefing at that point. We would have briefed both ministers, Minister 
Burke and Minister O'Connor, at the time of the communication to staff.  
Senator CASH:   Minister O'Connor was briefed as well. What action did they ask you to take?  
Ms James :  I wasn't directed in relation to taking any action. I explained what we were doing , and I said it was 
a priority for us to address this as quickly as possible. I said we we re appropriately resourcing it with people with 
expertise  and had  established principles that we  were applying . I wasn't directed specifically in relation to 
anything. I endeavoured to keep ministers informed of significant developments.  
Senator CASH:   You can provide this on notice if you don't have it : what was  the time  line in which you kept 
both ministers informed , and was that by way of written briefs or just general discussions or conversations ? 
Ms James :  I would say I spoke with Minister Burke on the 25 July . I advised Minister O'Connor's office on 
27 July , and in the context of the communication we provided a written brief. After that  there  would have been a 
number of communications that were by and large from the team.  
Senator CASH:   When did you notify the Fair Work Ombudsman of the underpayment?  
Ms James :  I might ask Ms Jenkins  to talk through that .  
Ms Jenkins :  We self -reported to the Fair Work Ombudsman on 9 August.  
Senator CASH:   When you self -report ed, what did you inform them of?  
Ms Jenkins :  I will start and then I'll pass over to the team. I let the Fair Work Ombudsman know that we were 
going to be sending a note . I rang acting ombudsman Krist en Hannah at that time and then the team took over 
from there , as is appropriate. I will now pass to the team to let you know the details that they provided in that first 
notification.  
Ms Cosgriff :  I can advise you that the self -report included a little bit of the background information on how 
the matter arose. It describe d the actions we had taken to date at that point in time , and it outlined the next steps 
that the department would take in rectifying the situation.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 19 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Am I able to get a copy of that on notice?  
Ms Cosgriff :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Thank you very much. In terms of the notification of the relevant union , when you advised 
Minister Burke that you believed an underpayment had occurred did he inquire as to whether  you had already 
notified the relevant union?  
Ms James :  We talked generally about who had been communicated with and what communications would 
occur, and in the course of that we discussed the importance of communicating with the union.  
Senator CASH:   When you discussed the importance of communicating with the union, did he ask you to 
report that afternoon to the union?  
Ms James :  No, I don't recall that. As I said, I haven't been directed by any minister in relation to how we 
address this matter.  
Senator CASH:   So it was left to you to address the matter ? 
Ms James :  Yes. I did advise the minister that it was our intention.  
Senator CASH:   But he didn't ask, 'Are you going to do it this afternoon'? Given the importance the minister 
places on unions in the workplace and assisting in uncovering potential wage underpayment, wage theft et cetera, 
I'm just a little surprised myself that you weren't  directed to advise the union. How long after you met with 
Minister Burke and advised him did you advise the relevant union?  
Ms James :  I think we've given you that   
Senator CASH:   I know. I've just got a notepad here . I'm just making my notes.  
Ms James :  It was 11 August  when we briefed the CPSU . 
Senator CASH:   Have you continued to brief the CPSU?  
Ms Cosgriff :  Yes, we have.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of actions that can be taken against you by the Fair Work Ombudsman, are there any 
actions that can be taken against you?  
Ms James :  I think it's appropriate to direct questions about regulatory consequences to the regulator.  
Senator CASH:   No, I'm asking you. You are a former Fair Work Ombudsman. In terms of an underpayment, 
what are the consequences that a person or an organisation can face?  
Ms James :  It's an example of noncompliance. The question as to what consequences might be encountered is 
one for the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator CASH:   So at this point in time you have not faced any consequences  other than back paying the 
$62,926 .52? 
Ms James :  We've advised the Fair Work Ombudsman , and I think you should put any questions around their 
investigation or their activities to the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator CASH:   So there is an investigation?  
Ms James :  You should put that question to the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. I'll ask the Fair Work Ombudsman then . That's fine. Where to from here? Given  that 
this was not something that , as you said , came up because of an actual complaint  it came up because of a query 
in relation to a different matter  have you done a complete audit of everything that you paid to ensure that no -one 
else has been underpaid?  
Ms James :  We've taken a number of steps to assure ourselves that we are getting it right . I might ask Ms 
Strangio to talk to that.  I will say that we are continuing to do that. That action is continuing.  
Senator CASH:   I'll get you to take me through when it started, the steps involved et cetera.  
Ms Strangio :  We are undertaking an audit. W e have engaged an audit of our payroll system.  
Senator CASH:   Who did you engage?  
Ms Strangio :  It's our internal audit provider, but I don't have   
Senator CASH:   That's fine. That's no problem at all.  
Ms Strangio :  It's through our usual internal audit program that a payroll audit will be undertaken in general 
terms to determine that we don't have any other issues.  
Senator CASH:   When did that commence?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 20 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Strangio :  I don't have that information at hand.  
Senator CASH:   That's okay. When is it due to be completed?  
Ms Strangio :  I'll take that on notice as well.  
Senator CASH:   Is there a cost involved in the internal audit?  
Ms Strangio :  I'll have to take that one on notice.  
Senator CASH:   That's not a problem at all. Secretary, did you meet with the minister in person, or was it just 
a phone call?  
Ms James :  I was with him in person.  
Senator CASH:   Did the minister request a broader review of terms and conditions across the department to 
ensure that there were no other underpayment issues?  
Ms James :  The minister asked me to ensure that we took appropriate steps to ensure there  were no other 
underpayment issues.  
Senator CASH:   Did you outline to him what you believed those appropriate steps should be?  
Ms James :  We discussed the project and what was in train and what was intended . 
Senator CASH:   Did the minister ask  you for an explanation of how you would ensure that  underpayment s 
won't arise  in the future ? 
Ms James :  I would say that was part of that same  conversation about future steps .  
Senator CASH:   In terms of to date, what rectification measures have you  introduced ? 
Ms James :  I'll ask Ms Strangio to talk to that.  
Ms Strangio :  At present, we are continuing to reconcile the information we have on our rostered employees to 
ensure that they have been paid appropriate entitlements and are continuing to be paid  those entitlements. At the 
moment the determination is still in effect , so we are applying the overtime provisions as written in that 
determination , which require us to pay overtime for seven  to 8 am and six to 7  pm. So we 're just continuing to pay 
overtime.  
Senator CASH:   Does that though risk other underpayments?  
Ms Strangio :  No. 
Senator CASH:   On what basis? Did you say you're applying it as it was? I think I misheard your evidence.  
Ms Strangio :  No. W e are paying overtime payments for those employees who are currently are and continue 
to be rostered . There is no underpayment  because we are paying  the overtime  as we now understand that 
entitlement to work.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. I just wanted to make sure that was the evidence.  
Ms Strangio :  It is being done through regular and continued monitoring of the payroll, the rosters and the 
time sheets.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. I want to table a press release from the minister, dated the 13 November 2019. While 
that's being circulated, Ms James, has the minister apologised to the staff in his department for the underpayment?  
Ms James :  I'm not sure why he would. It's my responsibility.  
Senator CASH:   It is. But he is ultimate ly the minister who's made a number of comments  and I'm going to 
run through them shortly  in relation to the impact of underpayments on people. If the answer's no, it's no.  
Ms James :  The answer is no.  
Senator CASH:   Have you personally apologised to the staff of the department for the underpayment?  
Ms James :  I haven't personally apologised  well, actually, I think I might have, in that video.  
Senator CASH:   Could we get a copy of the video then, please.  
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   When did that apology take place?  
Ms James :  Very close to the staff communication.  
Senator CASH:   In relation to the media release of 13 November 2019, th e now minister stated : 
Wage theft doesn 't just hurt those workers who are underpaid. It also has an impact on our economy, as people put off 
spending and struggle with stagnating wages.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 21 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Jump ing forward to today, the average underpayment was $635.25, the lowest was $ 889 and the highest was 
$4,051.07. There is an approximately four -month period in which people were underpaid and obviously did not 
have that capacity to spend. Given the four-month period  and I know you said there 's indexation  are the  staff 
entitled to any compensation, in particular given the minister's comments?  
Ms James :  In remediating the situation, w e have applied the appropriate interest and payments themselves. 
It's not our intention to provide anything in addition to that , and I'm not sure that that is something that is 
commonly done in these sorts of matters. In addition, as an accountable authority, I 'm not sure I 'd have a basis for 
paying people more than what they 're entitled to.  Obviously the interest is acceptable, but the underpayments 
themselves have a basis for me to make those payments. But I don't think I'd have authority under the PGPA Act 
to be paying more than that.  
Senator CASH:   Did you have a discussion with the minister in that regard  in particular, given that there is 
one person for whom, for all that time, it was $4,051.07, which is quite a bit of purchasing power or paying -off-
mortgage power.  
Ms James :  You are absolutely right: any underpayment of any amount has an impact and is not acceptable , 
and in the case of the person for whom it was over $4,000, that's significant. No, I haven't had any discussions 
with anyone about the prospect of paying in addition to the amount that people were owed  and the interest, of 
course.  
CHAIR:   Perhaps I could circulate an article headed, 'Australian social services department underpaid dozens 
of staff $400,000 over five years'. The article is from the Guardian . It goes to underpayments from October 2015 
to February 2020. Almost 70 current and former staff were underpaid a total, at the time, of more than $400,000 
in breaches of enterprise agreements. I want to ask a question about the processes that might occur in this 
particular case. I'm just mindful that there's been a quick response from the department when there's been alleged 
underpayments  an investigation taking place, independent assessment, notifications of the parties. And 
regarding this correspondence, unfortunately, compared with the quick action from the department in dealing with 
the underpayments, you'll see in that article, on the front page, that the public sector union claimed on the 
Tuesday that they had been making the department aware of the underpayments  since 2017 . The department 
eventually, some three or four years later, decided to act on them. The underpayments have gone from a period of 
2015 to 2020. So, after the union had notified of the underpayments, they continued to underpay.  
That raises some serious concerns about how departments in the past have responded to this and how these 
matters have been dealt with.  I go to the question about underpayments on any occasion  what the rectification 
is. Under this circumstance it's my view, my observation, that it seems to be dereliction of duty by the previous 
department in dealing with it, particularly after there'd been notification from the union. So, just going back to the 
questions that were asked by Senator Cash, if I understand this correctly, when the underpayments have been 
identified there's been an independent internal assessment, an independent assessment, notification to the parties , 
and notification to the union, and through all those steps there's been a quick, immediate assessment. Then when 
the underpayments have been found it's been rectified for the future as well, unlike this circumstance.  
Ms Jenkins :  Maybe I could make a couple of responses to that. While this was brought to the secretary's 
attention in June, we didn't know at that point in time whether or not there was an underpayment.  We thought 
there was. Reflecting on what happened with the machinery -of-government change, where there was 20 days to 
get this done, the lesson that was probably learnt there is 'less haste, more speed' . We really did think about how 
we could make sure we were continuing to progress this as fast as possible but not make mistakes. For example, 
once we got the information back with all of the entitlements, members of the team went through it line by line to 
make sure we were not compounding any errors  by making further errors . I say with my chief operating officer 
hat on that we worked as fast as we could, knowing from experience that when you go fast on these things you 
make inadvertent mistakes.  
Ms James :  I noted we established some principles  the executive board confirmed them  to apply to how we 
went about this exercise. This is part of the information we shared with staff. We wanted to resolve the issue as 
quickly as possible while ensuring accuracy and completeness. We wanted to learn and apply lessons from our 
experience and, of course, share them with other departments. I take no joy in reading about another department's 
experience with underpayment. I am of course extremely sorry that this happened.  
I appreciate the irony as a former Fair Work Ombudsman and as a former partner at Deloitte who spent a lot of 
time telling businesses to address these sorts of issues. I appreciate the irony there. As a result of that work I 've 
looked into the guts of more complex underpayments than many of you have had hot breakfasts I suspect, so in 
framing these principles and in taking this approach I was absolutely committed to ensuring that we dealt with it 
quickly, appropriately and transparently, that we properly resourced it and that we move d promptly but not with Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 22 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  such haste that we got it wrong, because ideally you want to remediate once and get it right. We engaged with 
staff on the detail of the calcs and gave them the opportunity to come back and talk to us about whether we got 
them right or not.  
Senator Cash is right that it would have been better if we had identified this issue earlier  of course it would 
have. I have seen  and this example you have tabled is one where you have historic blatant  underpayments and 
someone has belled the cat on them  that, if you don't act, it is one of the worst things you can do. I was 
determined to act promptly. I consider that we did , based on all we could do and my experience of looking into 
the guts of a number of these sorts of issues . There are some really distinct issues about the Public Service and 
machinery -of-government change context. That is not an excuse. It is a fact. When we asked about the lessons 
learnt and how this happened the primary contributor was the circumstances around the application of the Public 
Service Act  sections 24 (1) and 24 (1A)  the determination , our previous agreements and the speed with which 
we needed to resolve this. We might have had some different choices at the time of the machinery -of-government 
decisions around timing and type of instrument, but we were wanting to get the department up and running as 
quickly as possible. Perhaps we didn't make the best choices back then. That 's part of the lessons learnt. That's 
something that we 'll share with our colleagues at the Public Service Commission . 
CHAIR:   Thank you. Back to Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you, Senator Sheldon. Exactly: i t's complexity, complexity and complexity. It's often 
not complacency; it's actually the complexity of the system that produces, as you said, an inadvertent mistake. It's 
not complacency; it's actually the complexity of the system.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash, these people making honest mistakes   
Senator CASH:   Yes. It's not necessarily complacency ; that's correct.  
CHAIR:   One person 's complexity is another person's right s not being  represented , so people have different 
interpretations.  
Senator CASH:   Absolutely, and  that's why anything that  is deliberate is unacceptable.  
CHAIR:   A bit like tax , but it's  not as complicated as the tax system.  
Senator CASH:   Well, I  don't know about that . It's been a pretty complicated lesson today.  
Senator Watt:   I'm pleased to hear you say that if it's deliberate  I can't remember exactly what you said  'it's 
not on ' or something like that.  
Senator CASH:   If it's deliberate, it's unacceptable. Of course I said that. That was our policy.  
Senator Watt:   So you'll be  support ing our legislation to criminalise deliberate wage theft?  
Senator CASH:   We ask the questions . As much as I know you'd love to , we ask the questions.  
Senator Watt:   I welcome your interest in this underpayment . As I said at the outset today , any underpayment 
is unacceptable . 
Senator CASH:   Yes, exactly.  That's why I got you to  say it.  
Senator Watt:   Ms James has effectively said the same thing, so I hope that when it comes to deliberate 
underpayments  and there 's no suggestion that 's occurred here  we can count on your support on the legislation 
to criminalise that.  
Senator CASH:   I'm now going to go on to the department's use of interns. Does the department utilise 
interns?  
Ms Strangio :  Yes, we do.  
Senator CASH:   Can I just ask, as there is often a difference in understanding : what do you define as an 
intern?  
Ms Strangio :  That is a very good question.  
Senator CASH:   I know. This is a  problem  and that's why I was asking . Are there actual  rules and guid ance 
around the use of interns?  
Ms Strangio :  We are still collating a response to the question that we received in Senator O'Sullivan's letter . 
That will help us identify the extent to which we have interns. They 're not all centrally managed through a 
program. I can advise that we do have one internship program I am aware of that my team manages , which is  
called Stepping Into. It is a program of internships for people with disability.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you for that.  Generally, what type of work do interns do in the department?  
Ms Strangio :  We'll take that on notice.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 23 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   You've also  had to take on notice how many interns the department currently h as? 
Ms Strangio :  Correct, y es. We are working on that.  
Senator CASH:   Could I therefore ask you  for a breakdown of what  area they 're in, how long they 've been 
there , the work they do  and how often they 're utilised?  
Ms Strangio :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Where do interns come from? I 'm familiar with some of the intern programs . There  is the  
Public Service intern program , where they undertake an internship within the department and  then,  hopefully , 
progress into a more permanent role . Are  there also interns from , say,  university, high school  and TAFE?  
Ms Strangio :  I'd have to take that on notice . We  have a range of different programs. We have apprentices, 
interns, graduate s, school leavers and cadets.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. I see what you mean.  
Ms Strangio :  In relation to interns , I will  take that on notice. Generally, though, my understanding of an 
intern is that it  is someone who is presently studying, for example, and may attend the workplace during 
university breaks and that sort of thing . But that's  a general response to the question that you've  asked , and I 'm 
happy to take it on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. I didn't realise you also do school leavers and cadets.  
Ms Jenkins :  For us taking that on notice  because one of the things we debated was what you actually were 
after for the definition of intern  is there   
Senator CASH:   Now I can see why there was. Thank  you for th at clarification. In relation to interns, it's 
graduate s albeit I am familiar with graduates, but I'm happy for you to do it if it assists in the breakdown  
apprentices, school leaders and cadets . Are  there any other ways that you might source  we'll call them interns ? 
Ms Strangio :  No, but that's   
Senator CASH:   Understood  now. Thank you for that. I 'm not going to  call them interns now , because there 
are different categories , but I'll go through each one . On the  department's policy on paying interns : are all interns 
paid?  
Ms Strangio :  Anyone who performs work for the department is paid for that work.  
Senator CASH:   'Anyone  who performs work ' what does that mean?  
Ms Strangio :  For example , the program  that I mentioned earlier  is a paid program , so those interns   
Senator CASH:   Stepping Into?  
Ms Strangio :  Yes. Stepping Into employees are paid to work for the time that they have worked.  
Senator CASH:   Give me a circumstance in which an intern would not be paid?  
Ms Strangio :  I don't know of any circumstance  of what  you're describing.  
Senator CASH:   Could you clarify for me  on notice if there 's any intern in the department who's currently not 
paid. A re apprentices paid?  
Ms Strangio :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   Are s chool leavers  paid? 
Ms Strangio :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   Are cadets  paid? 
Ms Strangio :  Yes. 
Ms Jenkins :  The language we use , which may be helpful , is we refer to them as 'entry -level programs '. That's 
the umbrella term we use to describe when people are coming into the department  whether it's at a graduate 
level, a cadet level, or an apprentice level. An entry -level program is the terminology the department often uses. 
Senator CASH:   Is it an entry -level program for all  of those, apart from graduates?  
Ms Jenkins :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Is there a certain pay  scale for an entry -level program?  
Ms Strangio :  They 're all on different pay  scales depending on the nature of the program. Some of them come 
in at different classifications and are therefor e paid at different rates.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Does the department source them directly?  
Ms Strangio :  Not always.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 24 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   How would they be source d? 
Ms Strangio :  Through the Public Service Commission 's Career Pathways program. We use the whole -of-APS 
programs  as a source . 
Senator CASH:   Is that the feeder into  it? 
Ms Strangio :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   And in particular for the graduates?  
Ms Strangio :  That's right , for graduates . And then , for example,  the ATO runs the HR School Leaver program 
on behalf of the whole APS. T he Department of Finance also has a school le aver program  which is called a 
Career Starter program,  so there are various whole -of-APS programs that feed   
Senator CASH:   And they fee d, depending   
Ms Strangio :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Understood.  
Ms Strangio :  We source directly through those programs , but we do apply those programs where it 's 
appropriate.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you for continuing on with the work we requested  and t hank you for the clarification. 
Regarding  the university programs, a re short -term placements  a study program that has a short -term placement?  
Ms Strangio :  That is a general question that I can 't answer without getting the rest of the  information about 
the nature of the interns we have in our department at present.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you take anyone under the Workforce Australia's Observation Work Experience 
placements? Does  the department take anyone from that program at all?  
Ms Strangio :  I'm not familiar with that program . When I get  the information about interns that we are 
currently collating, I will see whether that is a program that has been accessed . I'm not familiar with that  program . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's just started under Workforce Australia.  
Senator CASH:   Did any personnel from the department , an agency or an organisation associated with the 
department atten d this year's Garma Festival?  
Ms Jenkins :  Yes. We had two attendees at this year's Garma Festival. The Secretary attended along with one 
of our Indigenous SES leaders.  
Senator CASH:   Was there just two from the department?  
Ms Jenkins :  That is correct . 
Senator CASH:   You've been very forthcoming with information, which  is making it so much easier. I really 
do appreciate it. Regarding  labour hire and the department , and you 'll know that I 've pursued this at previous 
estimates, what is the  current number of staff  in the department  both APS and non -APS? 
Ms Jenkins :  I'll give you the high -level numbers. We ha d 3,600 APS employees  on 31 August. There are 860  
non-APS, who are external labour hire contractors . 
Senator CASH:   Is it the s ame reference point?  
Ms Jenkins :  Yes. I would note that 's a decrease of 116 from last time.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. From last time I asked   
Ms Jenkins :  Maybe I gave you this last time  because you asked for it last time . The breakdown of that is  that 
506 of those are what we refer to as ICT contractors , for our technology  as you're also aware, we have a large 
program of digital services and we provide those to the Department of Education and also to other agencies , so 
that accounts for that  and there are 354 non -IT staff.  
Senator CASH:   And what roles are they in?  
Ms Jenkins :  Two hundred and fifty -six of those  are actually in our employment and workforce space. I might 
now just pas s to my colleague Mr Sladic , who is our CFO, to give you a bit more of a breakdown of those in 
particular.  
Mr Sladic :  To draw out what Ms Jenkins started to tell you , we have a number of those non -ICT contractors 
in our Workforce Australia parts of the department, in terms of call -centre type roles. That's a big proportion. 
There 's a slightly lower number of non -IT staff in some of our technology services and digital division s, to 
support non -IT related work. They would be the main ones.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 25 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   In terms of those who are on short -term contracts , what's the shortest length of contract and 
longest length?  
Mr Sladic :  Just to clarify  in terms of labour hire contractors?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Sladic :  In terms of that particular detail, I might have to take that on notice and come back to you.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, that's fine. In terms of people who are not from labour hire but are on short -term 
contracts: do you have those figures?  
Ms Jenkins :  Would you be talking about our non-ongoing  staff?  
Senator CASH:   That's correct  non-ongoing.  
Ms Jenkins :  We obviously have a broad range of work types , so I'll give you the non -ongoing workforce . At 
the moment, have 198  non-ongoing . To give you also some more detail in relation to that: that's just around six 
per cent of our workforce, and  those in  that particular workforce, when you look at it, are primarily for temporary 
increases in workload or demand. They are generally things like a program manager who would be brought in for 
a particular program  there are 30 of those  or program support officers  or program delivery officers. So, as you 
can see, they 're very program -specific. I can also tell you that there were 301 non -ongoing engagements over the 
period, and there are 198. That tells you that they 're churning in and out as the projects or programs finish. So that 
is the way that  we really focus on using our non -ongoing workforce for those particular roles. I can see that Ms 
Strangio has just stepped to the table. I'll explain:  from a labour hire perspective, those are procurement contracts, 
effectively , so that is why the CFO answers those questions.  
Senator CASH:   Understood.  
Ms Jenkins :  In relation to our employees who are on a  non-ongoing contract , obviously, where there is an 
opportunity to bring them on as an ongoing, we do so, but that is why the chief people officer , who is Ms 
Strangio, will answer that.  I'll just check if Ms Strangio has anything else to add  or have I stolen all your 
thunder?  
Ms Strangio :  No, I think you've covered that.  
Senator CASH:   That was very well done. In terms of the changes to fixed -term contracts that went through in 
December of last year  and commence over the next few weeks in December , would you take me through what the 
department is doing  to ensure that you are compliant with the new laws?  
Ms Jenkins :  Absolutely. Ms Strangio?  
Ms Strangio :  From 6 December, we are preparing to amend the manner in which we  engage non -ongoing 
employees, to ensure that we 're compliant. So we do that. That's all centralised through our recruitment team. I'll 
just explain, because it might be useful . There's the Fair Work Act and then there's the Public Service Act and its 
framework subordinate pieces of legislation and other guidance  that we apply in relation to non -ongoing 
employment  so, APS employees on short -term arrangements. From 6 December , we are required to be 
compliant, obviously, across the board, and so we will be engaging employees within the restrictions of: non-
ongoing employee , no longer than 18 months with one extension. So we will apply that. We 'll do that because all 
of our recruitment for non -ongoing employees is centralised. We monitor it through that process. So there will be 
the opportunity for us to ensure that all of those contracts are compliant.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you very much for that answer. In terms of the impact of the same job, same pay 
legislation , we got the charge -out rate for labour hire  APS 1, APS 2 et cetera  and then what the APS staff 
average rate is. For APS  1, the labour hire firm average charge -out rate is $28.04 per hour. The APS staff average 
hourly rate  is $32.99 per hour. In that case, will the department automatically apply to have the same level of pay 
put in place?  
Ms James :  Firstly, the closing the labour hire loophole legislation or measure is in the parliament right now. It 
has not passed yet.  
Senator CASH:   I know that.  
Ms James :  I don't think it is due to commence, should it pass, for a little while  maybe another year. The 
other thing is that the legislation as it's currently drafted doesn't universally apply. It's application based. We are, 
of course, monitoring this. We will be ready to apply the rules. We are already, and have been, taking steps to get 
better visibility of the actual pay rates for the people we have working with us. When Ms Jenkins was describing 
our different categories of people and where they sit from a responsibility point of view  before  I just see Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 26 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  everyone as our people, and I want to make sure they have a good experience working with us. I think there have 
been some changes coming from the Department of Finance that are going to help us get better visibility   
Senator CASH:   Is that across   
Ms James :  I might ask Mr Sladic to talk to that. 
Mr Sladic :  In August a people panel was established by the Department of Finance . We've  really got the next 
six months to work through transitioning existing labour hire contracts onto that panel. I think a really important 
part of that, just to reference our QON answer and the numbers , is to get more visibility around making sure we 're 
addressing what the hourly rate is in the new agreements we set up under that people panel. I think that should 
support   
Senator CASH:   Is that part of, as you said, all departments? Because it's set up by PM&C   
Mr Sladic :  Finance.  
Senator CASH:   That's the overarching umbrella?  
Mr Sladic :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Understood. Can I ask another question , then. If I go down to  EL2,  the labour hire firm 
average charge -out rate is $217.37. That is the charge -out rate. I know that. It 's not necessarily what the person 
gets. The APS staff average hourly rate is $90.62. Does it work in the reverse? The APS employee, if they 're 
working alongside an EL2 is it anything APS 2 and above? The APS rate 's actually lower than the charge -out 
rate. Can they apply?  
Ms Jenkins :  Are you talking about under the proposed legislation?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Jenkins :  I would need to confirm   
Senator CASH:   I am trying to work out what the same job, same pay   
Ms James :  I don't think that is the intention.  
Senator CASH:   Just with the APS 1.  
Ms James :  The other side of the bench is about to be populated with the people who can talk to   
Senator CASH:   I am just trying to work it out. It was only the APS 1. I know it's a charge -out rate, but is it 
only the APS 1 that are below?  
Ms James :  Based on that question on notice and the data at the time, that's right  noting that they are charge -
out rates and averages.  
Senator CASH:   And then you have to go through all of that to work out what the actual rate is, as opposed 
to I do note it says charge out. I did note that.  
Ms Jenkins :  While my colleague is coming, one of the other things that I think is really important in this is 
that these contracts are actually managed by the business. While we 've given you averages at an aggregate level, 
when you have someone  within your business who says, ' I need to have X people to do particular jobs ,' they are 
heavily involved in who they need  and how they need. They have a level of granularity and visibility over the 
contracts. I think that goes to the point you were making.  
Why I raise this is that we've given you averages. We've given you a high level across the department. When 
anybody seeks to use labour hire, they actually have a level of granularity , and will continue to do so , around this 
point here. When the Department of Finance 's people panel comes in and the other panel s come in , those people 
will be the ones who have that level of granularity and can make sure that, should the legislation pass, we would 
be compliant with the legislation.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. As I say, I was looking at this and I wanted to get it right in my mind.  
Mr Still :  The c losing labour  hire loophole measure will apply an obligation to pay the protected rate of pay 
where there 's an arrangement to supply labour directly or indirectly to a host. The obligation to pay is imposed on 
the employer of the labour hire provider who 's providing labour to a host. In the scenario we 're talking about here, 
the department is the host. Labour is being supplied to the department. Accordingly, there 's no obligation on the 
department as the host to change anything about the way it pays its own employees. The obligation is imposed on 
the labour hire provider, which would be whatever our labour hire provider   
Senator CASH:   To ensure they're no less than?  
Mr Still :  That's right. The total rate of pay that the labour hire employees must be paid must be no less than 
the rate they'd be entitled to be paid if, in our case, our section 24 determination applied to them.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 27 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Okay. With that, I think we have to   
CHAIR:   Yes, go to a break. There will be  around 20 minutes to half an hour to come back with for you.  
Proceedings suspended from 11:01 to 11:16 
CHAIR:   We'll recommence. Senator Roberts.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you to the witnesses for being here today. My questions are to the Department of 
Employment and Workplace Relations  is that appropriate?  
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator ROBERTS:   Just briefly, what are the relationships, statutory and in practice, between the 
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, the minister, the minister's office, the Fair Work 
Commission, the Fair Work Ombudsman and Coal LSL?  
Ms James :  There's a lot in that question, Senator   
Senator ROBERTS:   There is.  
Ms James :  I might ask for our workplace relations people to come to the table. You asked about the Fair 
Work Commission, the Fair Work Ombudsman and the coal long service leave board?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes, and also about the interaction between the department and the minister's office.  
Ms James :  And the department. Each of these institutions is established by legislation   
Senator ROBERTS:   The Fair Work Act  the Fair Work Commission and the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Ms James :  That's right. The Fair Work Commission is a tribunal and the Fair Work Ombudsman is a statutory 
officer , and she has the Office of the Fair Work Ombudsman supporting her.  I'm less familiar with Coal LSL, so I 
might ask others to talk about those institutions and the relationship between the department and each of them. I 
should note that they're all institutions that are independent. They're part of our portfolio, and we regularly talk to 
people in them . They are, of course, independent and responsible for their own activities. I think that each of them 
is appearing later today, should you have questions for them directly. Ms Godden?  
Ms Godden :  Thank you, Ms James. Broadly, the portfolio is the Employment and Workplace Relations 
Portfolio , and  the portfolio department is this department, the Department of Employment and Workplace 
Relations. The Coal  Mining Industry (Long Service Leave Funding) Corporation is a corporate Commonwealth 
entity within that portfolio. It means, for the purposes of the Administrative Arrangement Orders, that the 
legislation relating to that corporation, which establishes it and administers it, comes within the Employment and 
Workplace Relations Portfolio and the department's policy and administrative remit under the Administrative  
Arrangement Orders. To the best of my recollection, those are made by the Governor -General in council, but I 
can take that on notice to confirm for you.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. So Coal LSL reports to its own board? Who does it report to?  
Ms Godden :  The entity being a corporate Commonwealth entity, its accountable authority  I'm not sure if my 
colleague can recall , but I expect that i ts accountable authority  would be the board , but we'll take that on notice 
to confirm. Like any other corporate Commonwealth entity , it has an independent existence . It's not  part of the 
Commonwealth of Australia . It's  a Commonwealth corporate entity that is a separate  corporate entity with 
separate identity. So , in terms of reporting, it is accountable to its board. Ultimately, due to the legislative 
arrangements that set up the board and the corporation, there can be additional accountability measures that are 
put in place through that . For example, through provisions that would enable the termination of appointments . 
And the re will be additional reporting obligations set up through the Public Governance, Performance and 
Accountability Act , for example , around  corporate planning  and annual reports. There may well be additional 
requirements in the legislation itself , but I would have to take that on notice for you.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I think Coal LSL send reports annually to the department. Is that correct?  
Ms Godden :  The requirement would be to publish those annual reports. They may well be transmitted 
through the department as the relevant portfolio department.  
Senator ROBERTS:   There wouldn't be any oversight of those reports , then? It's just purely for publishing ? 
Ms Godden :  I'm afraid that's taking me outside my realm of expertise  there.  
Mr Hehir :  That's my understanding, that they're required to produce and certify their own annual report. We 
don't have a role in the certification. I'd need to check whether we occasionally assist them, but, in the main, my 
understanding is they are required to certify their annual report.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 28 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   And the minister doesn't have any specific accountability or responsibility for that 
either?  
Mr Hehir :  Not for the annual report. No, I don't think so ; I think it's a transmission letter to the minister.  
Ms Godden :  Some of the relevant reporting requirements in the PGPA Act include to prepare a corporate 
plan; to prepare an annual performance statement ; the annual report must include that annual performance 
statement , which is transmitted to the entity's responsible minister ; and performance information for the entity 
must be included in portfolio budget statements, or the PBS.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So the minister has some overall responsibility?  
Ms Godden :  Yes, it does, and the entity's responsible minister , or the finance minister additionally , have a 
power to request that the Auditor -General examine and report on the entity's annual performance statement under 
that act.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So it's not just cut loose to flounder on its own?  
Ms Godden :  I would not phrase it that way , no. 
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you, and thank you, Ms James, for your clear explanation.  
Ms Godden :  Sorry, I should just add I can confirm that the board is the accountable authority.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. Does the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations have any 
official or informal scrutiny over any of these entities, or do you work with them?  
Ms James :  I would suggest we work with all of them in a way that 's appropriate. We're responsible for the 
policy frameworks within which they're operating. They all have their own functions set out in relevant 
legislation. We regularly engage with our portfolio agencies about broader Public Service matters to ensure they 
understand things that are going on  APS bargaining and other policies that apply to the Public Service.  I think I 
would describe our engagement with them as regular but different , depending on the role . So with, for example, 
the Fair Work Commission, a quasi -judicial tribunal , our engagement is largely with the general manager of the 
Fair Work Commission, not so much with commissioners. With Fair Work Ombudsman , it's with the Fair Work 
Ombudsman and the staff of the office of the Fair Work Ombudsman . And, with Coal Long Service Leave  board , 
I'm less familiar with that, but others could probably talk to that.  
Mr Hehir :  I think Jennifer Wettinger can talk to those arrangements, but, again, my recollection of our 
engagement is we tend to deal with the general management rather than with the board , but I'll pass down the 
table.  
Ms Wettinger :  Thank you, Mr Hehir. That's correct. We do work closely with the CEO of the board, not the 
board directly , and u ndertake to work with them to provide advice and guidance.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So it's the general manager of the Fair Work Commission?  
Ms Wettinger :  Sorry,  this is for the Coal LSL board. The Coal LSL CEO is what I am referring to.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I met with senior officials from the department at the Commonwealth Parliament 
Offices in Bligh Street, Sydney, some months ago.  At that meeting, former coalminers Mr Simon Turner and Mr 
Sam Ste phens provided the members of the department with numerous hard -copy documents as evidence of 
improper conduct within Coal LSL, the Fair Work Commission, the Fair Work Ombudsman, the Mining and 
Energy Union  as it was before the CFMMEU  and Chandler Macleod group. The senior officials were  Ms 
Sophie Ismail, who is d eputy chief of staff, workplace relations , and a lawyer ; Mr Alistair Sage, advis er to the 
minister and lawyer ; and Mr Dar yl Watkins,  the chief of staff in the minister's office.  
Subsequently, Mr Turner and Mr Ste phens, without me , met with more senior personnel at the department 
offices in Canberra. They were Mr Daniel Trac ey, Assistant Secretary, Bargaining and Industry Policy  who is a 
lawyer  and Ms Jen Wettinger, Assistant Secretary, Economics and International L abour  and she liaises with 
Coal LSL, I understand.  Again, Mr Turner and Mr Stephens gave a detailed briefing and provided written 
evidence. Mr Ste phens, Mr Turner and I are concerned that they haven't heard anything back. What is happening 
with the review your staff have promised to conduct, and why have they failed to update Simon and Sam? He's 
been at this for eight years, and we've been helping his case for four years. People seem scared to pursue it.  
Ms Wettinger :  You're correct  I, along with my colleague Mr Trac ey, met with those two gentlemen and 
heard their evidence. As a policy department, we don't conduct investigations , so, through  the assistance of our 
minister 's office , we refer red the matter again to the Fair Work Ombudsman. They are the appropriate regulatory 
body to investigate the claims that were made by th ose two gentlemen . I understand that the Fair Work 
Ombudsman has since concluded its investigation , and that is the appropriate avenue through which  the two Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 29 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  gentlemen can make their evidence known. As a policy agency, we can certainly use that as evidence, in terms of 
undertakings and potentially making changes for the future, but we can't assist with the  current circumstances . It's 
the Fair Work Ombudsman that can conduct that investigation , and that's what they did.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you for that, Ms Wettinger. Do you think it would 've been reasonable to let 
Simon and Sam know? Simon has been smashed around  and I mean smashed around  for eight years . He's had 
no help from anyone . We've been working with him for four years, and it's been like swimming in treacle . He's 
got a very clear case. I 'll take it up with the Fair Work Ombudsman yet again this afternoon , but do y ou think it 
would 've been wise to just let him know?  
Ms Wettinger :  My understanding is that he was aware that the matter had been referred to the Fair Work 
Ombudsman and that that was the appropriate next step. I do believe  it will be a matter for the ombudsman when 
they appear again today  you can potentially ask them about the communication they've had  but, as I said, 
they're the appropriate body.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm going to be asking them. Thank you very much. Ms James or maybe  Mr Hehir,  there 
was an article in the Australian  newspaper on 1 5 September this year, saying that seven Western Australian 
enterprise agreements are substandard as a result of fake deals : 'The enterprise agreement sets terms and 
conditions  of employment that are far below industry standard.'  Are you familiar with the case?  
Mr Hehir :  I don't have a copy of the article in front of me . If possible , could I get a copy of the article  to look 
at? 
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes. Pardon my chicken -scratching on the top of it. I think the Fair Work Commission 
has taken that up . It's pursuing it now, as I understand it. I don't think there 's been a resolution. It was lodged by, I 
think, the Australian Workers Union.  
Mr Hehir :  The reason I want ed to make sure I got the chance to read the article is that there were  amendments 
made to the Fair Work Act last year . One of the matters that legislation  dealt with was to terminate what were 
known as ' zombie  agreements' . These were agreements that were made right at the commencement of the Fair 
Work Act , which didn't have the full protections that came  in about a year  later.  So there are a group of 
agreements that are historic al in nature and that were completely legal at the time, but certainly there's been an 
argument that many of them contain clauses that are not appropriate in the more modern context and not 
consistent with how agreements are struck nowadays. So last year  the bill did that. There was a provision in the 
bill that allowed parties to either seek to terminate or seek to keep them going, and the Fair Work Commission 
was hearing those. So it might be that circumstance, but I do need to see the article before I can actually describe 
that. 
Senator ROBERTS:   No, it's not.  
Ms Godden :  We'll just have a read, too, Senator , because some of the coverage arrangements are complex in 
WA.  
Mr Hehir :  Thanks for the context. I'm not personally aware of this one, but I've now read the article.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Basically my reading of it, from Ewin Hannan, is that an entrepreneur and maybe some 
of his close relatives set up enterprise agreements, voted them in and then enabled Chevron to use them to get 
cheaper labour . My question to you will probably have to be taken on notice. It says in the article by Ewin 
Hannan that the enterprise agreement 'set terms and conditions of employment that are far below industry 
standards'. What I would like you to tell me is whether 'far below industry standards' mean s below the relevant 
award, below the NES or simply below other enterprise agreements in the industry . 
Mr Hehir :  Again, looking at the context of what's in front of me, it does look like the Fair Work Commission 
was told there had been an approved process and it doesn't appear that any evidence led to the contrary, so it 
appears that someone has put false information to the Fair Work Commission in order to get an agreement 
approved. Subject to not being in the zombie period  then, the Fair Work Commission should still have undertaken 
a better -off-overall assessment, so it shouldn't be below the award. And the phrasing around 'industry standards' 
would imply that it's more about what was common in the industry rather than being below the award. So, based 
on the limited information I have in front of me, I'd say it's more likely to be below what's been negotiated in 
other agreements but probably above the award.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I respect you being somewhat equivocal  expressing that uncertainty. Could you get 
back to me on notice with the answer to my question, please.  
Mr Hehir :  Yes. 
Senator ROBERTS:   Can I have the document back?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 30 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Hehir :  Yes. 
Senator ROBERTS:   Have you got the copies now?  
Mr Hehir :  If you give us a reference, we can search for it. It's Ewin Hannan. I forget what the date was.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I think it was 14 September 2023, in the  Australian . 
Mr Hehir :  Thanks. We'll search that up.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I was going to read from other parts, but I'll let that go for now. Central Queensland  
coalminers and several Hunter Valley coalminers have been paid below the award , if that's the award rat e. 
They've also been paid below the National Employment Standards . If that's the award rate , some miners are on 
enterprise agreements which are far higher than the award. Some are below the award, and they're casuals with no 
casual loading. They're well below the award.  
I want to read you some details from Simon Turner's case . Injured  through no personal fault of his own and 
then later deemed totally and permanently disabled , his injury was not reported by his employ er, labour hire firm 
Chandler M acleod, nor by BHP, the host employer.  That's illegal  a breach of law.  His treatment was delayed 
weeks. He had no coal miners ' insurance, which again is illegal  workers' compensation. BHP confirmed to the 
mines inspector that the Chandler Macleod contract with BHP requires coal miners' insurance. It was not 
available. There was no accident pay to Simon, and that's an award entitlement that cannot be removed or 
displaced. Chandler Macleod had a workers' compensation policy with fraudulent certificate currency.  Simon was 
registered as being an office worker earning $28,000 a year. He was working the full roster valued at an award 
rate of pay that BHP paid Chandler Macleod. BHP paid Chandler Macleod that money valued at $136,000 a year. 
Simon got $66,000. The actual black mining industry award value on his work roster was verified by his Federal 
Court original statement of claim and by three independent lawyers. Two lawyers have verified it since.  I won't go 
through the rest of the details, but that man is still waiting for settlement and assessment of his case. I'll go into 
that with the Fair Work Commission and the Fair Work Ombudsman again today.  
We've got the Hunter Mining and Energy Union  which used to be part of the CFMEU, but they've split off, I 
understand  ripping off  workers with no accountability. They're complicit with Chandler Macleod in doing a 
dodgy enterprise agreement which is not only substandard but sub -award. It doesn't comply with the National 
Employment Standards . There's no accountability. There's no competition, because the union itself is protected. 
As a result, miners are leaving the union. Now they've got many non -union members in mining. Times have 
changed, and miners are leaving the industry rather than stay for the money that used to be very high in the coal 
mining industry. It was unheard of for people to leave the coal industry a few years ago, yet they're leavin g now 
because the coal companies are not being responsible.  
I have one final question for this bracket. This will be to Ms James, I think. It was a past government, but do 
you know why Coal LSL, the Fair Work Commission and the Fair Work Ombudsman were removed from the 
minister responsible for the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations and moved to the Attorney -
General's Department? Do you know why?  
Ms James :  I was not in this role or working for the Commonwealth when that occurred, so I'm not able to 
comment on it.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Do any of your staff know?  
Mr Hehir :  The only thing I can say to assist you is that administrative arrangement orders are done by the 
Prime Minister and authorised by the Governor -General. That's my recollection.  They're decisions of the 
government of the day.  
Senator ROBERTS:   But you don't know why?  
Mr Hehir :  We are not privy to that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Are you privy to why all three agencies returned to scrutiny under the Department of 
Employment and Workplace Relations in 2022 with the new government?  
Mr Hehir :  I wasn't consulted on the government's administrative arrangements. That's a matter for the 
government of the day.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Minister, do you know  you probably don't know  why Coal LSL, the Fair Work 
Commission and the Fair Work Ombudsman were removed by the previous government from being under the 
minister responsible for the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations  and taken to the Attorney -
General's Department? I can see you shaking your head. That's understandable.  
Senator Watt:   No. Obviously, if it's something   Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 31 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   Why was it moved back under your government?  
Senator Watt:   Unless someone at the table knows, I couldn't speak to why the former government made that 
change.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes, I accept that.  
Senator Watt:   Unless someone at the table knows the background to it being moved back to this portfolio, 
I'm happy to take it on notice.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. Please tell me the reasons it was brought back.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, I can take on that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm not arguing any position. I'd ju st like to know why. Thank you, Minister.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   This is my last line of questions for corporate, and then we'll go to outcome 3 
following this. I want to talk about rideshare use in the department.  Are you able to provide all regulated rideshare 
used by departmental staff and reimbursed by the department for the past three financial years? I'm happy for you 
to take that on notice, if you need to.  
Ms Jenkins :  We will probably take that on notice. The thing is we only existed from 1 July last year, so our 
time period will be a bit shorter. I think you said the last three years?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. 
Ms Jenkins :  We existed from 1 July last year.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Good point. Is there any ability to go back to the department of employment  the 
DOE, I think it was back then?  
Ms Jenkins :  DESE was the former department. The Department of Education is the department that remained 
when  we  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is it possible to get information of f the department of employment  for DESE ? 
Ms Jenkins :  They are coming  to you  this afternoon.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   No, not Education.  
Ms Jenkins :  Sorry  Employment.  
Ms James :  It was the same department. We're  once again traversing the consequences of  machinery -of-
government changes . When a machinery -of-government change happens, particularly with the new entity, we 
don't have access to that material . When we 've been asked these questions , we've consistently reported from  1 
July 2022; that' s what we 're responsible for.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So you no longer have access to that   
Ms James :  We can 't be comparable because we drew people in from three different government agencies. We 
found similar issues when we compare d our employee census data, for example. We just don 't have that 
comparison point or access to data or ability to manipulate it  for it to be reliably   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I understand the point.  
Ms Jenkins :  We will take the question on notice . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In doing so, can you  provide a breakdown of the average fa re, the highest fa re and 
the lowest fare . I'd also like to know which providers , and can you  include any trips that were reimbursed, how 
many trips, the highest tip,  the lowest tip and the average tip that was reimbursed for the period  for which  you can 
provide.  
Secretary, have you issued any guidance in relation to regulat ed rideshare use by the department  and by staff ? 
Ms James :  In the machinery -of-government changes , what happens is  that an interim period gets quite messy . 
We continued to apply a range of policies that existed in the former department , DESE. O ne of those policies was 
a travel policy. Of course, we m ake new chief executive instructions and various other thing s; we have made 
them . Initially  they by and large mirrored  what existed in that particular former department . I think we have 
revised the guidance with respect to rideshare which is, dare I say it  I hope I 'm not getting myself into trouble  
something I pressed for . I think we're consistent with a number of other agencies , but of course it 's each agency's 
responsibility to determine that . I think  Mr Howat son is bursting to share  some  more details.  
Mr Howatson :  Our travel policy was updated to permit the use of all rideshare facilities on 8 August 2022. In 
doing so , we permit staff to use them through a reimbursement basis.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Just to understand the evidence , you said 'to  permit ' so they're allowed to  do that ? Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 32 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Howatson :  They're allowed to, yes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   And they can be reimbursed for the use of that . 
Mr Howatson :  Correct.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Has the minister spoken to you, Secretary, about the use of regulated rideshare at 
all? 
Ms James :  Not that I recollect  by the Public Service or  by our department? No. There is a piece of 
legislation before the parliament that may impact on that , so we would have talked about policy relating to that 
legislation but not with respect to the department's own use, no.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So the minister hasn 't issued any directive or policy in relation to the department's 
use? It's now  permitted by st aff but he hasn' t asked for it  to no longer  be permitted?  
Ms James :  I'm not sure he would be aware of policies to this degree of granularity . He has  certainly not raised 
any questions with me about it before or after the change in policy.  
Mr Howatson :  The travel policy was issued under the AAI s and signed off by the  CFO , and the AAIs are 
signed off by the secretary.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The minister has had  some very  strong words to say about rideshare and in particular 
gig work . From a speech he gave last year on 26 August  you might be familiar with it, but I'm happy to table it 
if you require  it: 
Gig work drives down wages and it has been spreading like a cancer through the economy . 
He has some very strong words to say, as you can see from that statement , in relation to gig work , and rideshare is 
part of that  environment.  I'm surprised there hasn't been any directive to the department to not use rideshare. Why 
does the department utilise regulat ed rideshare?  
Ms James :  Firstly, it 's not the minister's role to give directions  about our travel policy ; that is my role. 
Secondly, I think we 've just articulated that our policy does permit the use of rideshare. I think there has been a bit 
of an evolution of the use of rideshare by the Public Service ; I can't talk to that because I wasn't in the Public 
Service , but I think there was a period where rideshare wasn't used and then things shifted. I don't know if the 
Department of Finance had issued guidelines about that sort of thing , but I understand that it is used throughout 
the Public Service.  I suspect the policies depend on what agency heads ' and secretaries ' policies are , and their 
chief executive instructions. Mr Howatson, can you fill us in on that history. Am I missing pieces?  
Mr Howatson :  The only other part of the puzzle is  that, traditionally , it was assessed  that the IT systems of 
the rideshare providers didn't have the necessary privacy protections , so we were n't encouraging the use of 
Commonwealth  credit cards as a basis for making those payments . But we are comfortable doing it on a 
reimbursement basis.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Secretary, do you agree with the minister that there is a systemic issue here?  He says 
it's 's preading like a cancer throughout the economy' . You said  the minister hasn't actually directed you to modify 
your policy. Do you see that there is an issue that could be addressed by you prohibiting the use of rideshare, to 
stop this so -called spread?  
Ms James :  That's not something that has occurred to me. From my point of view , in this role , as the 
accountable authority, I've got a range of things I need to take into account , including value for money and 
accountability. I think it  is good for our staff to have choice , and that 's a decision I make as an agency head . I 
believe it 's reasonably consistent with other departments  noting that there are some differences about how 
payments are made , and that might present some administrative challenges to us around reimbursement versus use 
of cards . We are in the deep heart of the administrative processes of the department here . It's something that I 
consider appropriate as the accountable authority. I should sa y that, in my own history, I have chaired an inquiry 
into the on -demand economy for the Victorian government that focused on gig workers. I am very familiar with 
the tensions and the issues . In the context of this conversation, I wouldn't be commenting on the broader policy 
issues the government is pursuing , which is, I suspect, the context in which Minister Burke made that statement, 
whenever he made it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Secretary, have you used rideshare, be it in your capacity as secretary or even in a 
personal capacity?  
Ms James :  I have , and I do.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you then not align yourself with the minister's statement that it is 'spreading like 
a cancer  throughout the economy '? Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 33 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James :  I am very conscious of the tensions when it comes to the digital economy.  When I was doing that 
inquiry into on -demand work for the Victorian government, I used rideshare, and I used to take the opportunity 
every time to ask my driver: 'Why are you doing this? What is it you like about it? What is it you don't like?' I 
didn't consider it evidence, but , interestingly,  what I heard from drivers was pretty consistent with the evidence 
that I heard in that inquiry. There is a system here that operates to the benefit of consumers and indeed the benefit 
of drivers, but that isn't to say that there aren't concerns about it  concerns about drivers being deactivated 
without any rights, concerns about what drivers are paid and concerns about safety.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But you're happy to use them ? 
Ms James :  I am. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you happy for the department to   
Ms James :  I make my own choices about that. You asked about tips, and that's something that, in my personal 
capacity, I consider as well.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Have you used rideshare in your professional capacity, and have you sought 
reimbursement for it?  
Ms James :  Yes. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Minister, how about you?  
Senator Watt:   What was the question  whether I use rideshare?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. 
Senator Watt:   From time to time I do. I don't know about you, Senator, but I always make a point of tipping 
those drivers in recognition that they're not being paid what I think they should be. My personal view is that I'd 
rather t hat they  be paid a fairer rate, because I don't really think Australia is the kind of society where people 
should have to rely on tips to survive.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Secretary, when you 've tipped the driver, do you seek reimbursement for that tip , or 
does that come out of your own pocket?  
Ms James :  I don't. I consider that to be a personal choice that I'm making. I should say that, when we consider 
the choices that we have, particularly when we're travelling, there are a range of choices. Cabs and rideshare work 
well in different situations. I have stood at the cab rank outside Flinders Street Station and watched cab after cab 
refuse to take people because the trip was too short or because of where they were going. I've go t into a cab and 
been told, 'You have to pay upfront a certain amount.' Once,  when I was on business, I said : 'I can't do that. I've 
got a card.' In the end, I just paid for it myself. So there are issues with all of these choices. To my mind, it's about 
safety as well. I don't want my staff, if they go to a function in the city, to be unable to get home because of the 
way the cabs operate in some parts of the city they're in. In my case, it's Melbourne.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I agree with all of that. I just find it astonishing, though, given the minister has made 
such strong comments about this, that the department hasn't adopted the spirit in which those comments are made. 
This is 'spreading like a cancer'. I disagree , but those are  the minister's words , and the department ha s not in any 
way modified its policy to reflect the fact that that's the view of the minister.  
Ms James :  I think there's no doubt that the digital economy has shifted markets. When we talk about the entry 
of different players and the impact that that's had, it's absolutely had a systemic impact. That's something I think 
we're all aware of and conscious of. For those of us who were locked down for many months in Melbourne, we 
were very reliant on elements of the gig economy to help us out during that period, but I think there are things to 
balance from a regulatory point of view. In this case, it's not the minister's role to direct me.  We have different 
roles here.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But you have that role, don't you? As you said earlier, you could issue that directive.  
Ms James :  I could, but I'm not . In making decisions around this   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So it's just for everyone else?  
Ms James :  If you want to go to the nature and possible impact of the legislation, I think that's a different 
question. Right now, I feel like we're talking about the morality of using what are legally available services. From 
my point of view, I consider the department's policy to be appropriate.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I won't take more time , but obviously the minister is using quite pejorative words in 
talking about it being a 'cancer' . So, when you raise it as a potential moral issue, it's actually the minister that's 
raising the concern for that industry. I just find it very surprising that the department is not following that.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 34 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   I don't know whether you 've seen other comments from the minister , but he has acknowledged 
that he personally from time to time uses digital technology like all Australians do.  But his view, and my view, is 
that people should be able to use 21st -century technology without the workers being paid  under 19th-century 
conditions . If you agree with that proposition , you'll be voting for this legislation , and I look forward to your 
support.  
CHAIR:   Senator  Watt , before I go to Senator Roberts, do you find it abhorrent that some people are getting 
paid as little as $6 an hour in gig work? Do you find it abhorrent that they don't have workers compensation, they 
don't have access potentially to sick leave, they don't have access to any annual leave entitlements, they don't have 
rights to being reinstated, they don't have rights to collectively bargain and they don't have rights to argue that the 
rates of pay they're receiving or the conditions are unsustainable? Are any of those things inherently matters of 
concern to you?  
Senator Watt:   I agree. I think most Australians think that it's wrong that, because of big multinational 
corporations using digital technologies and loopholes in workplace laws, the people who work for them suffer 
those kinds of conditions. Australia has a proud tradition of a fair day's pay for a fair day's work, and, 
unfortunately, that has been unpicked by companies using digital platforms and loopholes in the law to ensure that 
those workers end up with the kinds of conditions you're talking about. In this day and age, we shouldn't let that 
happen. If we're serious as a country about a fair day's pay for a fair day's work, we should close those loopholes. 
Again, anyone who claims to support that principle should be supporting that legislation.  
Senator ROBERTS:   My question is to Ms James, I think. I very much want to protect workers. Having 
worked very hard with Simon Turner in the Hunter Valley and miners in Central Queensland, I'm disgusted at 
what 's going on  that's not aimed at you. They 're not being protected by the Fair Work Act  due to its complexity 
and prescriptive ness. Complex legislation is helping dishonest union bosses and dishonest corporate players , and 
the Fair Work Commission , the Fair Work Ombudsman and Coal LSL have been complicit. They 've enabled this 
exploitation of workers.  
So my question is : why patch a complex, prescriptive mess that is failing and add to that, because it 's the 
complexity that enables these predators to scurry around the cracks ? I would like you to tell me about the 
loophole , but, firstly, I want to say that, in desperation after a number of people had failed to help these miners in 
Central Queensland and Hunter Valley, I introduce d the same work , same pay legislation. But I kept digging , and 
Simon Turner kept digging , and we realise now that it's not needed  because the best solution is to simply enforce 
the Fair Work Act. It 's not being enforced ; it's being abused by union bosses and some large multinationals. Could 
you please define Minister Burke's loophole  for me ? 
Senator Watt:   Before Ms James answers: I haven't made this point up until now, but, as you know, the 
mining and energy union strongly rejects your claims that they've been dishonest, corrupt and all the other things 
you've accused them of being.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Of course they would.  
Senator Watt:   My personal experience with that union and its officials  and I've had a lot of that experience, 
particularly in the Queensland coalfields  is that they fight very hard for their members and often have extreme 
conflict with some of the big coal companies that you're talking about. So  you're suggest ing they're in league 
together , but that is certainly not my experience.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I must address those comments , because the only way that a min er can be working in 
the Australian coal industry below the award  and that 's what many of them are  is through an enterprise 
agreement  with the CF MMEU.  That's the only way. That's correc t. 
Senator Watt:   That's not true. What has actually happened is that some of the large coalmining companies 
have engaged a big proportion of their workforce through labour hire arrangements as a way of undercutting the 
enterprise bargaining agreements that the union has struck with those companies . That's the loophole we are 
trying to  close.  
Senator ROBERTS:   The only way they can be employed below award rates is through an illegal enterprise 
bargaining agreement  that is signed off with a stat dec by the CFMMEU . That is correct.  
Senator Watt:   That isn't correct. I've met those labour hire workers who are employed by labour hire firms 
under arrangements  that the union is not a party to,  and the coal companies have used those labour hire firms as a 
way of undercutting the wage s that they're required to pay under the enterprise bargaining agreements that they've 
struck with the union.  
Senator ROBERTS:   If we can get Simon Turner to Brisbane, will you meet with him?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 35 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   Sure.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. That's wonderful. In December 2005, there was a loan by Xstrata to the 
CFMEU mining and energy division. I'm willing to provide you with details later. In the annual financial return to 
the Registered Organisations Commission, the union revealed a loan of over $2.4 million to Abelshore. Abelshore 
is 100 per cent owned by Xstrata. In fiscal year 2022, AEC's significant  third party disclos ure returns shows  $8.7 
million income. I was a member of the miner's federation, a very proud union, which looked after miners' 
conditions, and no -one kicked them around. Initially, I also worked with the CFMEU as a mine manager and had 
a lot of respect for them. They are not the same entity because they formed a labour hire firm, the first labour hire 
firm in the Australian coal  sector. They formed it . According to CFMEU construction leaders , it was an 
immediate conflict of interest because they were an employer and they were a union. That's where the rort started. 
They did a very good job. I was a mine manager in the Hunter when the labour hire firm that the CFMEU created 
started in the Hunter to protect miners thrown out of work. It has since been abused and now it is causing the 
problem.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts, a lot of that was a statement. I'm not quite sure what anyone at the table can 
actually answer.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I was responding to Senator Watt. To come back to my original question: can you please 
define what the loophole is in Minister Burke's closing the loopholes bill?  
Ms James :  The closing the loopholes bill contains of   
Senator ROBERTS:   What is the loophole?  
Ms James :  I think the minister would frame it as addressing a number of loopholes. It contains a number of 
measures, many of which were election commitments and most of which, I think, were signalled by the minister 
at his Press Club addresses on 1 February and 31 August. There  are a range of measures in the legislation. Mr 
Hehir and Ms Godden can take you through some of the detail. Are you interested in hearing about a particular 
measure in the bill?  
Senator ROBERTS:   He keeps calling it the 'closing the loopholes bill'. I want to know what the loopholes are 
that he's closing. I want the definition of 'loophole'. I'm not interested in the bill yet. My staff have read it. I've 
read parts of it.  
Senator Watt:   By all means, the officials should elaborate, but it's essentially what I just said to you. It 
doesn't just happen in the coalmining industry, unfortunately.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Senator Sheldon has done a good job.  
Senator Watt:   Aviation is a massive problem. Other industries are as well. Unfortunately, the way the law 
works at the moment, if a company enters an enterprise bargaining agreement, in some circumstances they have 
the ability to get labour hire workers who are employed by a different entity on lower terms and conditions and 
bring them into that workforce. That's essentially the loophole. The officials can probably put it in more detail.  
Senator ROBERTS:   From what I've seen  and I've seen and done a lot of detailed work in the last four -and-
a-bit years  those loopholes are due to blatant nonenforcement of the Fair Work Act . 
Senator Watt:   I'm sure that there are examples of nonenforcement of the Fair Work Act, and that's something 
that needs to be addressed.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'd be addressing it.  
Senator Watt:   But the problem is that, due to the loophole that I've just described to you, it is perfectly legal 
for the big mining companies and other employers to do that at the moment.  
Senator ROBERTS:   The only way a miner can be employed in the Australian coal sector below award rates 
is through a dodgy deal with the CF MMEU enterprise agreement. That's the only way.  
Senator Watt:   It depends on whether you're prepared to listen to facts or not. I've already explained to you 
that that is not true, and I've explained why it's not true.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You're going to meet with Simon. That'll explain  more   
CHAIR:   If it's of assistance, Senator  Roberts , Mr Hehir wants to answer some of your questions as well.  
Mr Hehir :  We have had this discussion before, but it's the Fair Work Commission that has to sign off on 
enterprise agreements. It has the obligation to ensure that the agreement meets the better off overall test. While I 
know that it takes into account evidence provided by the parties, it actually has the obligation to ensure that the 
enterprise agreement meets the better off overall test. 
Senator ROBERTS:   I agree totally.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 36 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Hehir :  I think it is worth noting that the courts have delivered rulings over a number of years which have 
changed people's understanding and probably the commission's understanding of what that better off overall test 
is. But, notwithstanding that, it's still up to the commission to ensure that the agreement meets the better off 
overall test.  
Senator ROBERTS:   The Fair Work Commission has told me that you must at least meet the award and the 
national employment standards.  
Mr Hehir :  The national employment standards are required. In terms of determining what meets the better off 
overall test, the test is made against the relevant awards. So, yes, it's got to be better off overall against the 
relevant award or awards. There is inherent in that better off overall test the capacity for trade -offs, which the 
commission has to consider against overall. But , as I said, there's also guidance from the courts on how they 
conduct that test. I hesitate to suggest that Ms Godd en might be able to talk through some of that detail with you , 
but I think in practice it's probably a stricter application now than it was when the act was first passed.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts, you have time for one more question.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I haven't got any more questions; I just want to hear the definition of 'loophole'.  
Ms Godden :  'Closing loopholes' appears in the short title of the bill. 'Loophole' is not defined in the bill. It's a 
broad -brush way of referring to the measures in the bill  to give it a short title.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So it's a sales job?  
Ms Godden :  It's a way of naming the bill. What the minister has outlined in the press and in his second 
reading speech are the measures that are covered within that closing loopholes bill. I'm happy to go through them  
if that would be helpful. But you've said that you and your office have read the bill, so I don't want to do that if 
you are already familiar with them.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Can you give me examples of loopholes? We understand that there are many loopholes 
according to the minister's sales pitch. Can you tell us some examples of loopholes?  
Mr Hehir :  Minister Watt has already described the concerns around employers using labour hire to pay less 
than what they would otherwise be required to their employees, which I think is in part the circumstance you've 
been talking to with Mr Turner. Our understanding is, from what you said earlier, that what they were paying in 
the EA was significantly higher, whether it met the terms of the award or not. In noting that there's such a big gap, 
it's entirely possible that you can have a labour hire agreement that does meet the terms of the award but doesn't 
meet what's being paid on site to employees. So it's that gap there.  
Senator ROBERTS:   To be clear, Mr Hehir, that's the award level of pay. Some enterprise agreements are 
well above the award. That's the prerogative of the employer and the employee and their representative to 
negotiate. Some are well below the award.  That can be fixed. That's not a loophole. That's just a lack of 
enforcement by the Fair Work Commission and the Fair Work Ombudsman of the Fair Work Act.  
Mr Hehir :  Without wanting to go over ground that's already been covered, the legislation requires the Fair 
Work Commission to make an assessment as to whether the proposed enterprise agreement is better off overall . In 
that circumstance, they have to do that consideration against the award.  I understand that you have concerns about 
this particular one , and, as I've said before, there ha ve been different interpretations based on court decisions over 
time.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm pleased you said that, because a Fair Work Commission employee has told us that 
there is no BOOT  test on the required  form  I can't remember the form number. There is no record of a BOOT 
test anywhere with regard to the specific award under which Simon Turner was employed  none. 
Mr Hehir :  That's not information that I have in front of me. You'd have to  get  
Senator ROBERTS:   No, but I'm telling you. I'm happy to discuss it with you later. Join us at the Fair Work 
Commission this afternoon.  
Ms Godden :  To clarify about the BOOT , there were amendments made to that test in the secure jobs , better 
pay reforms last year. That was to clarify that the better off overall test  is applied a s a global assessment . It's not  a 
line-by-line comparison between the proposed enterprise agreement  for which approval is sought  and the relevant 
modern award.  
Senator ROBERTS:   What do you mean by 'global' ? 
Ms Godden :  It means that it's taken as a whole. The enterprise agreement is taken as a whole, having regard 
to patterns or kinds of work  and types of employment that are reasonably foreseeable at the time the better off Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 37 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  overall  test is applied. But it is not line by line of each condition in the enterprise agreement against each 
condition in the relevant modern award.  
Mr Hehir :  An example is that the  award might set  a period of work.  
CHAIR:   Mr Hehir, just before you answer that question  and go  any further , there's one final question after 
this, if you wish.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I just want to  see some examples of loopholes, according to Minister Burke . 
Mr Hehir :  We have given you the loophole in relation to labour hire and the use of that to engage workers 
paid at a lower rate than employers would be paying. The other major area is , again , where we've had some 
questions today . It's not about the specifics of the legislation but in relation to establishing a fair rate of conditions 
for employee -like workers. We've talked about wage theft.  
Senator ROBERTS:   That's the gig thing or casual contract s? 
Mr Hehir :  That'd  be establishing a fair rate of pay for contractors. In other areas , we've talked about wage 
theft to an extent, which , to your point, is already unlawful  but still seems to occur. There  are also some measures  
in terms of   
Ms Godden :  Small business redundancy exemption  is a good example. It's p art 2 of schedule 1 to the bill. The 
measure preserves the redundancy entitlements of employees whose employer has downsized due to insolvency. 
As you might be aware, s mall business employers are ordinarily exempt from redundancy pay obligations. 
However, what was happening where a large business was progressively reducing in size due to insolvency  was 
that the  last 1 0 employees , as an  example , might not be entitled to a redundancy . This measure ensures  that those 
employees  receive the same redundancy entitlements as colleagues terminated earlier in the downsizing process.  
It's a much smaller measure in the bill, but it's a really good example of the sort s of loopholes that the bill is 
covering.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I do have one further question. What elements of the minister's bill  could stop Simon 
Turner and other miners getting their legal entitlements  in other words, going back and getting their entitlements 
at the time they were employed , at the time the enterprise agreements were signed and at the time they worked? Is 
there anything in there that's going to cover up those breaches and let people off the hook?  
Mr Hehir :  The legislation is not intended to operate retrospectively. A consistent approach, but not a 
universal approach , is not to make laws retrospective , so in this case the legislation doesn't frame it 
retrospectively ; it applies it from  a commencement date.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you.   
[12:14]  
CHAIR:   I know we've traversed outcome 3, but now we're officially going to outcome 3. Thank you for the 
cross -portfolio section.  
Senator CASH:   I have some very brief questions following up  a line of questioning in the previous estimates  
in relation to the Productivity, Education and Training Fund . Has the first tranche of funding as announced in the 
2022 -23 October budget been provided to the recipients?  
Ms J Anderson :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the evidence given at the previous estimates, the evidence was that the 
organisations that were eligible for grant funding in the first round were ACCI, A i Group,  BCA,  COSB OA and 
the ACTU. Were there any other organisations that were considered eligible?  
Ms J Anderson :  It was actually a closed grant application process . Those five organisations were identified. 
They were the only ones  able to apply.  
Senator CASH:   They were the only ones identified. They're the five organisations. Did all of them actually 
apply for the funding themselves? Or were they called and told , 'There is some funding ; would you  like it?' 
Ms J Anderson :  I recall that a letter was provided. I might have to take that on notice in terms of the exact 
method of communication to them. I recall it might have been a letter , but if I could   
Senator CASH:   I'll ask on notice  if I could have a copy of the letter. In terms of the definition of 'eligible', 
what were the criteria?  
Ms J Anderson :  There was a set of grant guidelines  established . They are available publicly on the Grants 
Hub. So they are a public document. There w ere four criteria. Would you like me to go through them?  
Senator CASH:   No, that's fine. Who was the decision -maker who determined eligibility?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 38 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms J Anderson :  We had a panel established to assess the applications. That was made up by an SES band 1 
officer and two executive level staff . I was the delegate.  
Senator CASH:   How does that then sit with that five organisations were identified? Also then having the 
panel?  
Ms J Anderson :  The five organisations were asked to apply. We only received four applications. So the 
assessments were only made on the four applications.  
Senator CASH:   So they were asked to apply? Understood. And then they put in an application  only four.  
Who didn't apply?  
Ms J Anderson :  The Business Council of Australia  did not apply .  
Senator CASH:   So they didn't apply and  they didn't get any grant funding. The other four did apply. Did they 
all get the grant funding?  
Ms J Anderson :  The four that applied all received the grant funding.  
Senator CASH:   How  much did each organisation receive , and what is the period of the contract for each 
organisation?  
Ms J Anderson :  There were  actually two sets of funding.  There was an original grant amount of $5.06 
million.  
Senator CASH:   For each one of the four?  
Ms J Anderson :  No, that was the total amount. That was split fifty-fifty between employee representatives 
through the ACTU application , and employer representatives for the remaining three applicants. I can take you 
through how much that was.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine, I can do that calculation. So there were two sets of finding. The $5.06 million 
was the initial. Has the second set of funding been allocated?  
Ms J Anderson :  Yes. That was a further $20 million.  
Senator CASH:   And that was split fifty-fifty as well?  
Ms J Anderson :  That is also split fifty-fifty.  
Senator CASH:   And just between the four? No -one else?  
Ms J Anderson :  That's correct.  The grant guidelines are pretty strict on that.  
Senator CASH:   Just making sure. Are p ayments made in a lump sum at the start of the contract or 
periodically during the term of the contract?  
Ms J Anderson :  Full payment of the 2023 -24 funds was made  on 12 July. I would like to take that on notice, 
though. I am 90 per cent sure that it might be an annual payment , but I would like to take  that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine if you need to take it on notice. If it's found that the money wasn't used for the 
purposes for which it was granted, are there clawbacks in the grant  agreement?  
Ms J Anderson :  There are. I n relation to the Commonwealth grant guidelines, the grants are very clear that if 
any of the applicants don't meet the requirements of the grant, the department has the ability to pull that back.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. And that would mean that the department could also claw back in the event that 
the intended purpose is not being met, or the money is not spent at all.  
Ms J Anderson :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   I'm assuming that  there are milestones et cetera , and, if I go to the grant funding  reporting,  I'll 
see that.  
Ms J Anderson :  Reporting, time  frames and all of that is attached.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the $20 million, how was that figure arrived at?  
Ms J Anderson :  It's probably a government decision in terms of the amount. But certainly it was in 
recognition of the additional scope, I suppose, of workplace relations reform going forward.  
Senator CASH:   Remind me ; what is the purpose of the  PET funding?  
Ms J Anderson :  Basically the purpose  this is in line with the guidelines itself is to provide funding to 
support employer representatives and unions to better engage with the government's law reform process . That 
includes through engagement with their members and the government to enhance tripartism, to deliver on  specific 
workplace relations reform agenda, and also undertaking educational and practical activities to support their 
members to understand and implement the government's workplace relations reform  measures .  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 39 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   In relation to all four of the organisations , if engaging with government and supporting 
tripartism is already part of the core business of the recipient, on what basis were they assessed as needing grant 
funding?  
Ms J Anderson :  This also stems back to the outcomes of the Jobs and Skills Summit , where there was a very 
strong focus on supporting greater tripartism across  the board in government. This is certainly to recognise that 
desire to increase that tripartism in government. Certainly , just in my space alone, there are a lot of  tripartite 
meetings  that require these organisations to attend . So it certainly supports  those applicants. But certainly we 
looked at that as part of the criteria , in terms of how they utilise any funding to support  those criteria.  
Senator CASH:   And BCA just outright didn't even put in the application.  
Ms J Anderson :  Yes.  
Senator CASH:   What was the reason?  
Ms J Anderson :  I can't go to why. I don't have that.  
Senator CASH:   Is it possible to get that on notice?  
Ms J Anderson :  We might have to ask BCA themselves , potentially , as to why they didn't . 
Mr Hehir :  I'm not sure that they communicated  that.  
Ms J Anderson :  They just didn't.  
Mr Hehir :  I think  they just didn't put the application in.  
Senator CASH:   Excellent. Can I now turn to the regulatory impact statement of the closing the loopholes bill. 
Does everybody have a copy of the regulatory impact statement in front of them? The one that I'm referring to is 
actually this one here, not the online version, because the pages do differ.  I will take you to page s 44 to  45: 
'Closing the labour hire loophole (OBPR22 -02409 )'. It's at the back of the explanatory memorandum.  On the top 
of page 45, it states  the department states that the calculations regarding the labour hire provisions 'have a 
significant degree of uncertainty '. What does that mean , other than the obvious ? 
Mr Hehir :  I might lead off and then pass to Mr  Cains . We've talked in the past about the data limitations. The 
approach that we've taken is to clearly use what's available, but that doesn't necessarily reflect a high level of 
detail. I think that the dot points  underneath it sort of set out the core of that , which is   
Senator CASH:   The data limitations ? 
Mr Hehir :  Yes. That's the main limitation. What we have is just the data at a very high level  or actually not 
collected through the ABS or other methodologies.  So we've had to rely on different m ethods.  
Senator CASH:   Where does the data come from?  
Mr Hehir :  We've used ABS data where we can, but we've also used data from other sources where we can 
find it. Sometimes there are limitations to that data.  
Senator CASH:   So 'uncertainty ' should actually  just be read in the normal course of the definition of 
'uncertaint y'. And, as you say, you then go on to actually say, ' Data limitations include the following  10'; it goes 
on to state, as you've pointed out, that the data has significant limitations,  and the limit ations  are set out 
underneath. Understood.  
Mr Hehir :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   In saying all of that, when businesses are looking at this, because there are so many 
limitations  and I admit you do qualify it  yourself by saying  'have a significant degree of uncertainty ' you can't 
guarantee that the calculations have a significant degree of accuracy . 
Mr Hehir :  I might qualify that. The calculations themselves  are fine; it's  the assumptions that sit underneath 
them.  
Senator CASH:   But i t's the limitations underneath that. Understood.  
Mr Hehir :  It's the assumptions that you have to make   
Senator CASH:   Understood.  The calculations are based on the data limitations.  The issue that then arise s, in 
percentage terms , is: what is the degree of uncertainty in terms of the calculations? Are they  out by five  per cent? 
Are they out by 50 per cent?  
Mr Hehir :  Again, we've had to make assumptions based on  and it will be different for each particular item, 
and that will depend on the level of data confidence the ABS might have, if we've been able to access ABS data. 
But, if we haven't had to access ABS data , we can instead, to use a different example, access the labour hire ones . Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 40 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  There are a number  of estimates of how many employee -like workers there are. There's a range. We've worked 
with that range because   
Senator CASH:   What is that range?  
Mr Hehir :  I'd need to   
Senator CASH:   I'll get someone to have a look at it while you're   
Mr Hehir :  We don't have good ABS data on that, so we've had to make an estimate. Some of those estimates 
are based on what the firms who use the employee -like workers have told us; others are based on other 
information.  
Mr Manning :  Consistent with what Mr Hehir is saying, we used ABS data where we could and where ABS 
data wasn't available we tried to use the most reliable data sources that we could. To continue the example Mr 
Hehir is talking about, for platform workers we used the Victorian national survey that the secretary presided over 
back in 2019, noting that there are limitations in the sense that there have clearly been changes to that since the 
pandemic.  
Senator CASH:   On page 44 it does state : 
Available data on the labour hire workforce has significant limitations as result of the small  sample size   
Mr Manning :  I'll just point out that the ABS will be releasing a new dataset that will look at that in more 
detail . I think it's scheduled to be released for the first time later in the year.  
Senator CASH:   That poses a small problem. The department  has been very upfront in the explanatory 
memorandum, and acknowledges the calculations 'contain a high degree of uncertainty as a result'. The issue that 
has been raised by employers who will be complying with the new laws if and when they go through is that the 
cost outlined in the regulatory impact statement  we're talking about the labour hire provisions  could actually 
be greater. A number  of the employers say they are significantly greater based on their own calculations, given 
the admi ssion  here that there is a significant degree of uncertainty.  
Mr Hehir :  I might get the team to talk you through the calculation of the difference between the labour -hire 
workers and the enterprise agreements. One of the main areas of uncertainty in labour hire that we've identified is 
that there's no data on internal labour hire. No data means it's difficult  to be entirely accurate about that element of 
it. 
Senator CASH:   In addressing t he issue that we're talking about, and what Mr Manning just said, when the 
ABS do release the next lot of statistics, if there is a material impact on the calculations, are you going to be 
updating the explanatory memorandum?  
Mr Hehir :  We can certainly have a look at whether there is a material impact. Normally, the regulatory 
impact statements don't get updated   
Senator CASH:   I understand  that. 
Mr Hehir :  I'd need to have a look. It's not something I can hypothesise without seeing what the data looks 
like. 
Senator CASH:   Mr Manning, when are they going to be released?  
Mr Manning :  To clarify, I'm not talking about labour hire. I'm talking about platform workers.  
Senator CASH:   Same difference  there is additional information  that's going to be released.  
Mr Manning :  I think it's December. In relation to the impact analysis equivalent for the platform work 
measures, we've looked up the number  of hours to understand  the measures, the number  of hours to update 
documentation and the number  of hours to update IT systems. Those factors won't change according to the ABS 
data. That goes to the number  of people who may be working for digital platforms.  
Mr Hehir :  My recollection is that, because we don't necessarily  have the pay rates of the employees within 
the organisations who will be doing that work, we've used the rate that the Office of Impact Analysis identifies as 
the appropriate rate.  
Mr Manning :  For that work we have, there's also analysis in there based on the most authoritative source, 
which is the 2019 Victorian study. That looked at the evidence  they had about what the workers were receiving 
and compared it to relevant awards.  
Senator CASH:   And did you say that was in Victoria?  
Mr Manning :  The study I'm referring to is the one the secretary referred to earlier, which she pr esided over 
2019  and which was done in Victoria.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 41 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That what's I mean. W as the workforce comparison Victoria? That was what I was asking.  
Mr Manning :  It was based on a national survey that was done as part of that study.  
Senator CASH:   That's what I wanted to understand. Now, Mr Cains , are you going to explain something to 
me, or have we explained it in the conversation?  
Mr Cains :  In terms of the impact on individual employers, there will be varying impacts , of course. The 
assessment we've  undertaken is a global assessment using the best data that we have available across the 
economy. We 've had to make a series of assumptions because of the limitations in the data, but of course the 
actual impact on individual workers and employers will depend on how much they 're being paid, and, without 
looking at every individual instance of when labour hire workers are used by hosts with an enterprise agreement, 
we can't calculate that. So we have undertaken a global assessment.  
Mr Hehir :  You can see there, on page 47, the same impact analysis. In table 2 , 'Accounting for the casual 
loading ', we've had a look at what the initial median hourly wage  is for a labour hire worker, what a non -labour -
hire worker gets, the wage difference and then an adjustment for the median hourly wage, and that's done with 
reference to the A BS characteristics of employment data. There are some parts which are pretty reliable, but there 
are other bits where we just don't have the data.  
Senator CASH:   And you've clarified that. I'll turn to  page 22. This is part of 'Standing up for casual workers ' 
in the EM. If you go about a third  of the way down, it states , 'there is not explicit alignment between the statutory 
provisions and this data set ' used to estimate the number of casuals w ho'll be affected by these p roposed changes.  
Again, what does that actually mean?  
Ms Williams :  What that is actually going to, as my colleagues have been outlining, is that, where there is not 
explicit alignment between what we are trying to achieve with the policy reforms and the dataset, we use ABS 
data to have the best approximate measure for how we can look at the intent of firm advance commitment  and 
what that might mean in relation to casuals  and match that with the best available data from the ABS 
characteristics of employment. So, on that, the approach we applied for the impact analysis equivalent for the 
standing up for casual s measures use d the same methodology that we used with the casual amendments that came 
into law in March 2021. And that methodology is a consistent methodology that has been used by the department 
and indeed by our stakeholders, including employer and union stakeholders, for approximation with the concept 
of firm advance commitment from ABS data sources.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. On page 22 again, just a little further down, it states:  
Therefore, assumptions are needed to provide an estimate of the number of casual employees who may be eligible to access 
the employee choice definition pathway to permanency, to provide a robust estimate of the outer limits of regulatory impact.  
You then list a number of assumptions, as you can see. How did you test those assumptions?  
Ms Williams :  As I outlined, we used a consistent methodology that the department and others have been 
using to approximate, from ABS data. In terms of testing these assumptions, that is the methodology that we used.  
I can explain how we got to those figures, if that would be helpful.  
Mr Hehir :  If you are looking at the top third of the page, it sets out some of the key characteristics or the key 
questions that the A BS ask. In terms of the different levels of information, in terms of r egular casual employees  
Tara can work this in detail  my expectation would be  that they're probably the people who expect to remain in 
their job for the next 12 months. They're quite likely to be people who are guaranteed work for a minimum 
number of hours each week. We work through those questions and then use that analysis to say, 'Do we think 
they're likely to be regular?' We tend to be a bit conservative  I don't mean  we go on the low side ; it's probably 
on the high side . So we've got a base assessment. It is based on reliable information in that the  questions that are 
asked  are reliable . There's an interpretation element as to what that mean s for the person.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. In regard to the cost to businesses of, say, disputes on the new casual test, has 
the department done any calculations in relation to what  that might cost?  
Ms Williams :  No. The impact analysis is compliant with the advice from the Office of Impact Analysis, and 
that does not require any costings of dispute resolution. Similarly, when we did the regulatory impact statement 
for the SAJER , we also did not cost dispute resolution as part of that.  
Senator CASH:   If I could now just go to pages 6 and 7  we're still in the same part of the explanatory 
memorandum  it states  that the  data projects that have 'informed design of the proposed new legislative settings ' 
were qualitative interviews with just 12 current and recent casual employees and just eight employers of casual 
staff. How did that work?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 42 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Williams :  I'm happy to talk you through that, Senator. This was one data project of two that were  
commissioned as part of the statutory review of the SAJER reforms. That data project by the Behavioural 
Economics Team of the Australian Government in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet actually 
included some qualitative surveys, as you've pointed out.  
Senator CASH:   Did you update it or is it based on the data you already had?  
Mr Manning :  When doing impact analyses , where there are recent relevant studies you are able to refer to 
them.  In this case, we referred to the relevant parliamentary inquiry and that. So, referring to those products 
themselves, they were not updated given their timeliness and relevance to the issues that are being considered. We 
didn't go out and do new surveys, for example.  
Senator CASH:   I understand. You had a relevant comparison that you could utilise, and then, on that basis, 
you used the relevant comparison.  
Mr Manning :  To answer some of the questions, yes.  
Ms Williams :  I'd just say it wasn't just qualitative surveys. That BETA research actually did online surveys of 
1,200 current and recent casual employees and 800 employers of casual staff.  
Senator CASH:   Where is that?  
Mr Hehir :  It's in the dot point above the one that you read out.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. That was BETA, and it involved  when was that done?  
Ms Williams :  That was done over the period of the statutory review, which occurred last year from 11 April 
and was handed to government on 11 October.  
Senator CASH:   So it is contemporary.  
Ms Williams :  Yes, very.  
Mr Hehir :  It's probably just worth noting it is quite good practice to do both the quantitative and the 
qualitative. You get different information from them, but it's bringing them together.  
Senator CASH:   Correct, but it's depending on what you  yes, understood. Okay. Could we now go to  and I 
want to make sure I'm not doubling up here  page 14. Can we go back to the 'Closing the labour hire loophole '. 
What it says here is that it estimates the 'upper limit' of the regulatory costs of the measure will be $510.8 million 
annually for businesses. This assumes that the proposal will affect a subset of businesses and workers in the 
'labour supply services industry', as defined by the ABS, plus a 'guess' that a further 6,000 workers employed 
under internal labour hire arrangements could be captured. How did you define 'labour supply services industry'? 
What was the definition that was used there?  
Mr Tracey :  The definition of 'labour services industry' is something we've adopted from the ABS data 
sources. It's not something we have defined; it is how the ABS characterises the data.  
Senator CASH:   Could you take me through that definition?  
Mr Tracey :  I may have to take that one on notice unless one of my colleagues can find it.  
Senator CASH:   Perhaps someone could, because this is going to go on for a little while. Perhaps someone 
could look up the definition for me, because I do want to ask some questions based on the actual definition. In this 
definition, did 'labour hire ' include service contractors?  
Mr Tracey :  My understanding is that the answer is no, but I can double -check that for you.  
Senator CASH:   So it was a stock standard definition of labour hire. We can pull that up. That is fine. So it  
does not include service contractors. On that basis, the definition is the standard definition of labour hire. The new 
test requires up to 12 different criteria to be considered, compared to just the one currently. How did you work 
through those calculations?  
Mr Manning :  Are you talking about casuals or labour hire?  
Senator CASH:   Sorry, casuals. I didn't realise I hadn't asked a page of questions. I do apologise.  
Mr Manning :  In relation to casuals generally, the fundamental concept at the core of the definition hasn't 
changed, in terms of the absence of a firm advance commitment to ongoing and indefinite work. There are factors 
in the current definition that can be looked at as indicators of whether or not that's met.  We're seeing  commentary 
saying, 'You only had to look at one thing, as compared to a number of things now.' We don't agree with that, 
based on what's in the current definition.  
Senator CASH:   Can you just take me through that again?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 43 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Manning :  The current definition, as I said, has the same core concept as the proposed new definition, but, 
in the current definition, there are still factors that can be looked at as indicia of whether or not there is a firm 
advance commitment   
Senator CASH:   Explain to me what the current definition is.  
Mr Still :  Section 15A of the Fair Work Act presently provides a definition of casual employment.  
Senator CASH:   Could you read that  out? 
Mr Still :  It does go for a page and a half, but the core of it is:  
(1) A person is a casual employee of an employer if:  
(a) an offer of employment made by the employer to the person is made on the basis that the employer makes no firm 
advance commitment to continuing and indefinite work    
That element of a firm advance commitment to continuing and indefinite work is what Mr Manning was referring 
to as the common core element between the proposed definition and the old definition. It goes on then to 
additionally refer to 'according to an agreed pattern of work for the person' and it then requires that 'the person 
accepts the offer on that basis' and 'the person is an employee as a result of that acceptance.' That's subsection (1). 
That's the core of the definition.  
Senator CASH:   That's the core of the current definition.  
Mr Still :  Yes. And then the definition goes on to provide a number of factors that can be taken into account  in 
assessing that core test of firm advance commitment. Those are provided in subsection (2). There is some 
commonality with the proposed definition ; in particular, there's a reference to whether employees can elect to 
offer work and whether a person can accept or reject that work. In fact, references to regularity of work in the new 
definition reflect back to the pattern -of-work reference that's currently in the core definition.  
So it's a very similar concept, although there are differences in the particular factors that are picked up. 
Probably the most significant  difference  is in the circumstances that can be used to assess the firm advance 
commitment.  
Senator CASH:   I have to hand over the call   
CHAIR:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   but I'll come back to it.  
CHAIR:   Thanks very much. Senator Payman.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Good afternoon. This is just with regard to what we've been talking about with the 
closing the loopholes bill and, obviously, in light of the strong outcomes on jobs, wages and the gender pay gap 
under secure jobs, better pay that we heard about earlier this morning. Why did the government introduce the 
closing the loopholes bill? Perhaps the minister can take that?  
Senator Watt:   That's probably one for me, Senator Payman. In essence, this is the next step in our 
government's plan to get wages moving again and to deliver more secure work for Australians. Earlier today, I 
talked a bit about the improvements we've made so far as a result of our first piece of legislation  the secure jobs, 
better pay act. Those are increased wages, more jobs, more job security, closing the gender pay gap and much 
lower levels of industrial action because there's more bargaining happening. But, obviously, there's more work to 
be done. This piece of legislation, particularly, seeks to close a number of loopholes that exist in the current 
workplace laws which result in different types of workers being underpaid or facing insecure work. There are a 
range of measures in this bill addressing those.  
Senator PAYMAN:   The impacts assessed by the department indicate that a small number of employers will 
be required to pay their workers more. What is the estimated total figure for the wage bill across the Australian 
economy?  
Mr Manning :  Senator, you're asking what the impact is. The expected impact is $918.2 million economy 
wide, which amounts to just under 0.1 per cent of the total wage bill. The outcome of the impact analysis 
equivalent is that the figure of $918 million would be paid in increased wages as a result of the measures in the 
bill increased wages and increased payments, some to employees and some to independent contractors.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Okay. And on the $9 billion cost in the bill's regulatory impact statement: what impact 
will that have?  
Mr Manning :  That figure is extrapolated out over 10 years, which is normal for impact analyses processes.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Great to have that clarified. What consultation took place ahead of the introduction of the 
bill? Who was consulted  and who was involved?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 44 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Hehir :  I'll get Ms Anderson to come and work through the detail s with you, but this was quite an 
extensive consultation process. Indeed, for a number of these measures we had actually already entered into 
consultation prior to the introduction of last year's bill. So some of this consultation has been going on for a very 
extended period of time. However, there was also a particular point in time when the minister announced that we 
were going to consult formally. I might get Ms Anderson to talk you through that.  
Ms J Anderson :  The formal process that has just been referred to  really started following Minister Burke's 
National Press Club announcement of the reforms back on 1 February. Since that time, we've undertaken over 75 
meetings  it's probably edging up more towards 100 meetings.  The department also received over 220 written 
submissions , which we called for, in relation to the proposed measures in the bill . Those submissions were  from 
over 160 organisations.  We also undertook consultation through our usual  channels, which is the National 
Workplace Relations Consultative Council, or NWRCC, and also through our usual committee of industrial 
legislation processes. We also engage with states and territories quite heavily on this bill.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Can you remind us how many submissions were received for the public hearings and 
who made those submissions?  
Ms J Anderson :  Do you mean Senate inquiry hearings?  
Senator PAYMAN:   Yes. 
Ms J Anderson :  I'm not sure whether I've got that information.  
Mr Manning :  During the department's own work we received more than 220 written submissions from 160 
organisations. That would be in addition to the submissions received by this committee.  
Senator PAYMAN:   And with those  hearings, we're holding six hearings into this bill. When is the last time 
we have had this many hearings on an industrial relations related bill?  
Mr Hehir :  I'm not sure that I would have a recollection of that. We probably tend to focus more on the 
substance of the actual submissions. I'm not sure whether I've got a record of hearings. That might be something 
the committee secretariat could help you with.  
Senator PAYMAN:   And why is it important that this bill is not split?  
Senator Watt:   Again, that's probably one for me. The government believes that all the amendments contained 
in the legislation matter. It's not a matter of picking and choosing which ones matter and which ones don't, or 
which ones are urgent and which ones aren't. From our point of view, all the amendments contained in the 
legislation are urgent, whether they are about the very real issues that Senator Pocock was talking about around 
PTSD for first responders and others or are about the fact that there continues to be a group of workers in the 
Australian community who don't get a fair day's pay for a fair day's work.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Thank you.  
Senator CASH:   Going back to labour hire, and working through the explanatory memorandum: did we 
confirm that the ABS definition is just the traditional definition of labour hire services, so it doesn't include 
service contractors?  
Mr Tracey :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   And I really appreciate your doing that. Working through the explanatory memorandum and 
the bill, do you agree that there's nothing in the bill that prevents the Fair Work Commission from making a 
regulated labour hire arrangement order for workers and businesses who are not part of the labour hire services 
industry and to service contractors?  
Mr Tracey :  There's no strict provision in the bill preventing that   
Senator CASH:   Yes. Understood.  
Mr Tracey :  but there are other provisions that   
Senator CASH:   So, there's no strict provision   
Senator Watt:   Well, can we just  you interrupted before the answer was completed.  
Mr Hehir :  I think t he phrasing of the legislation is important. It's not a strict prohibition against the inclusion 
of services contractors. I might get Mr Tracey to read the clause out , but my recollection is: that the Fair Work 
Commission must not make an order is actually the stem of the provision, and then where it's not fair, roughly. 
Then there's a series of tests that the commission have to   
Senator CASH:   Did you say there were 10?  
Mr Hehir :  No, I said there's a series of tests.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 45 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Tracey :  There'd be five factors that are listed in the legislation. There is a sixth factor listed, which is just 
anything else the commission considers relevant, if submissions are made by the parties. But the bill expressly 
sets out five different issues that parties could choose to raise with the commission if they wished.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Exactly. And that's what I was looking for: there's no strict provision in the bill 
that says they are excluded. There's the number of steps that need to be taken, and the party disputing it would 
need to go to the Fair Work Commission. Understood.  Do you agree that there is nothing in the bill that prevents 
the Fair Work Commission from making a regulated labour hire arrangement order  this is quite specific  
covering workers in businesses that are undertaking a joint venture, and the joint venture partners who contribute 
workers towards a project could be captured by the measure  this has been something that has been raised to the 
mining industry  for example, min ing businesses and engineering businesses who are part of the joint venture ? 
Mr Tracey :  Similar to the previous answer, there would be  no express prohibition in that regard but it is 
something the commission can take into account if the parties consider it is relevant.  
Senator CASH:   That is understood, okay.  
Senator Watt:   And, of course , it is worth recognising that Australian Resources and Energy Employer 
Association has been involved in discussions around  resolving those issues in the way that has just been 
explained.  
Senator CASH:   I'm going through the minister's comments that , yes, they are specifically excluded. There is 
no strict provision. There is a test that has to be worked through, and an application would need to be defended.  
Senator Watt:   We would say they are excluded via the commission having the power to consider those 
matters.  
Senator CASH:   So there is no strict provision is the answer to the question, though ? 
Senator Watt:   No, but they are excluded because of the matters that have just been explained.  
Senator CASH:   No, they are not , because that is obviously a decision for the Fair Work Commission. There 
is no strict provision is the answer to the question. There is no specific exclusion, because, if there was, we would 
be currently working through a particular section of the bill.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, but the intent is to exclude those types of businesses via the Fair Work Commission's 
discretion.  
Senator CASH:   And so if we have an intent, why didn't the government say , 'We are not going to actually 
include them . The intent is to exclude them .'? Why put businesses  to the time and cost of having to go and prove 
they should not be included because they are actually service contractors as opposed to the definition that has 
been used here  labour supply services.  
Senator Watt:   Mr Hehir can explain that thinking for you.  
Mr Hehir :  It is important to look at the EM as well. Paragraph 589 of the EM sets out they do not intend to 
contract for specialised services. It provides an example there. It talks about how the new subparagraphs , which is 
the test you referred to , would outline factors that would inform this consideration . Not all the factors listed would 
need to be satisfied for the Fair Work Commission to find that the arrangement relates to the provision of a 
service rather than the provision of labour. One of the complexities here is a firm or a contractor might name 
something as a service contract  but it might be  for the provision of labour. What we are doing is allowing the 
commission to look underneath what a name is , determine what the substance of the arrangement actually is , and 
determine what is fair and reasonable in those circumstances. We understand this matter has been raised . We have 
met with Professor Stuart , who also raised this . This  is one of the issues. We are aware it is an issue. But the 
complexity we are dealing with in this one is it is really hard just to say 'service contractors ', because , even when 
we met with service contractors , they said , 'Part of our business is labour hire  but not all of it. ' So actually going 
through a multifactorial test was the way that we saw we were able  to do that. The Fair Work Commission  has the 
expertise to look at these matters and say, 'Yes, that is a service contract ,' or 'No, that does not actually look like a 
service contract ; it looks like the provision of labour. ' 
Senator CASH:   So the service contract is captured unless they litigate their way out of it?  
Mr Hehir :  That is not the way I would phrase it.  
Senator CASH:   In practical reality , they have to litigate themselves out of it . 
Mr Hehir :  The practical reality is they might be asked. Given it is an application based approach, they might 
be asked to demonstrate to the Fair Work Commission why and how it is a service contract rather than the 
provision of labour.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 46 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   The government has made some very specific exemptions in the bill. For example, group 
training organisations are exempt. Again, why has the government decided not to specifically exempt service 
contractors , because the issue that is being raised obviously is  the commission must make the order unless they 
litigate their way out of it. So it is time, cost et cetera to the business only to be found that they should not have 
ever been included, or should not be included?  
Mr Hehir :  My previous answer respon ds to this one as well . It is actually quite hard to say that particular 
contract is a service contract just because of the title of it.  You have to go beneath and see what is being  provided 
and that is what we are asking to look at here. I might pass to Mr Still.  
Mr Still :  In terms of training arrangements, the exemption in 306 G(1), which is the exemption in relation to 
training arrangements   
Senator CASH:   Do you mean in the bill you are referring to?  
Mr Still :  Yes. It refers to training arrangements as defined in the act, which are training arrangements that are 
recognised by state or territory regulatory arrangements. Those arrangements are subject to regulatory regime in 
each state or territory , which provides a degree of clarity and certainty about the nature of the arrangement.  
Senator CASH:   Looking at the bill and the explanatory memorandum, do you agree there is nothing in the 
bill that prevents the Fair Work Commission from making multiple regulated labour hire orders or arrangement 
orders covering an individual employee? For example  if one union gets one order  and another union applies to a 
supplementary labour high regulated order, I am trying to work through how that would actually work in practice?  
Mr Cains :  I think that would probably go to the ability of the union to represent the worker. If a worker is 
classified in a certain way, union rules would usually dictat e who they are able to represent and that would mean 
that generally a work er would only be able to be represented by single union.  
Senator CASH:   What happens if the union represents the employee? One union gets one order and another 
union applies for a supplementary labour hire regulated order. What then happens? Is it correct you can apply for 
supplementary labour hire order?  
Mr Tracey :  There are a couple of different types of orders contemplated in the bill . There is the ordinary 
regulated labour hire arrangement order. There is also an alternative protected rate of pay order and an arbitrated  
protected rate of pay order . In relation to the ordinary orders the commission can make , one of the things they 
must specify is the employees to be covered , which  can include  a class of employees. So we think , in practice , the 
way these  applicatio ns are likely to play out is if an applicant comes forward to the commission seeking an order , 
the commission will be able to consider all of the employees being  provided by that particular provider and list 
them as the class of employees to be covered by the order made.  
Senator CASH:   When you say you 'think , in practice ', has that been tested?  
Mr Tracey :  No, as a new jurisdiction , we  
Senator CASH:   Working through the explanatory memorandum again , do you agree there is nothing in the 
bill that prevent s the Fair Work Commission from making a regulated labour hire arrangement order covering 
subcontract ors in the construction industry?  
Mr Tracey :  So the measure is not intended to cover contractors.  
Senator CASH:   When you say 'not intended', what does that mean?  
Mr Tracey :  The commission will have jurisdiction to make a regulated labour hire arrangement order if a 
number of things are satisfied. One of those things are that employees of an employer are provided to what we are 
describing as the host, so there needs to be an employment relationship there between the work and the labour 
hire provider . Any arrangements by way of independent contracting or subcontracting arrangements will not meet 
that initial threshold test for the commission to make an order.  
Senator CASH:   Can you take me through that again because that is very important. Subcontractors in the 
construction industry, you are saying, will be excluded?  
Mr Tracey :  The way I would frame it is that  the commission will have jurisdiction to make an order if you 
have an employer , for example, a labour hi re provide r providing  employees to a different business  the host . If 
there is no employment relationship there  between the worker and the labour provider   
Senator CASH:   So that is the key there?  
Mr Tracey :  then the commission won't have jurisdiction to make an order for that arrangement.  
Senator CASH:   Again, going through the explanatory memorandum , is it the case under this particular 
measure that , even if a business can satisfy the Fair Work Commission that it only provides services to other Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 47 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  businesses , this is not sufficient to actually exclude the business from being the subject of an order? It's only one 
of a number of factors the Fair Work Commission needs to take into account . 
Mr Tracey :  I might have  to ask a point of clarity .  
Senator CASH:   Under this particular measure , even i f a business can satisfy the Fair Work Commission that 
it only provides services to other businesses  so it has satisfied that element  that element itself is not sufficient 
to exclude the business  as there are other considerations . 
Mr Tracey :  The short answer to that is yes. The commission can take that into account as part of its fairness 
and reasonableness assessment.  
Senator CASH:   Is it referred to as 'the fair and reasonable ' test?  
Mr Tracey :  Yes, that's right, the multifactor test.  
Ms Godden :  It is intended to weigh  in favour of the Fair Work Commission finding that it would not be fair 
and reasonable to be applying to the arrangement.  
Senator CASH:   On my question in relation to the subcontractors , the test is it has to be employer and 
employees ; no employment relationship , order can't be made.  
Mr Tracey :  That's right.  
Ms Godden :  That's in proposed new section 306E , subsection (1), paragraph (a).  
Senator CASH:   Can you read out that subsection , so I have it in my mind ? 
Ms Godden :  Subsection (1) provides that the Fair Work Commission : 
 must, on application by a person mentioned in subsection (7), make an order (a regulated labour hire arrangement order ) if 
the FWC is satisfied that : 
(a) an employer supplies or will suppl y, either directly or indirectly , one or more employees of the employer to a regulated 
host to perform work for the regulated host ; and 
There are also a paragraph (b) and a paragraph (c). I'm happy to keep reading.  
Senator CASH:   Please do. I'm just trying to get this right in my mind in case I have another line of 
questioning.  
Ms Godden :  Paragraph (b) provides  the following : 
a covered employment instrument that applies to the regulated host would apply to the employees if the regulated host were to  
employ the employees to perform work of that kind   
Paragraph (c) states:  
the regulated host is not a small business employer.  
Did I read that too quickly?  
Senator CASH:   No, that was read very  well. I'm just trying to process it in my mind . Are they the factor s that 
can be considered and the Fair Work Commission could in any event make the regulator make  a higher order , or 
is it different for subbies ?  
Mr Still :  Those are  jurisdiction al facts, so they must.  
Senator CASH:   It's the ' must ' understood . Professor Andrew Stewart h as been quite strident in his views on 
the bill . He has  said that basically the bill does cover service contractors , and I think he put in a submission , so we 
are all aware of what his views are. You said that you had met with  Professor Stuart . How are  the concerns he has 
raised being worked through?  
Mr Hehir :  I might go to the issue that he has raised . It is very similar to the issue you are raising, which is:  
can there be an absolute exclusion in the first instance rather than a subsequent test to determine the nature of the 
relationship ? We had quite a long conversation with Professor Stewart. He maintains his view , but when we 
work ed through the context of the complexity of how to define a service contract  because if you are going to 
exclude it , you have to define it and the defining of it leads to a series of tests  I think he understood that at some 
point there  needs to be a test that the Fair Work Commission will have to look at to see whether a service contract 
is actually a service contract  or a contract purported  to be a service contract was actually one. In one sense we had 
to look at:  where do you do that? The government made a decision to include the stem of that test , which is the 
'Fair Work Commission must not in the following make its decision ' sorry, I don't have the clause in front of 
me. We tr ied to make it as clear as possible that if it is not fair and reasonable based on the factors above  which 
include the intent as outlined in the EM  it is not the intent of that part to regulate contracting for specialised 
services and they must not make a protected rate of pay order. Professor Stewart maintains his position ; we will Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 48 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  provide advice. I think he accepts that you can't just use the term 'services contract '; you have to determine what it 
is. What does that actually mean ?  
CHAIR:   I'll pursue this after the lunch break.  
Proceedings suspended from 13:16 to 14:16  
CHAIR:   We'll resume. Senator Cash ? 
Senator CASH:   Thank you very much, Chair . I'm going  back to the standing up for casual workers part of the 
regulat ion impact statement. I will go back to labour hire as well, just for those who are on the labour hire side. I 
want to  go to page 25. About halfway down the page, it refers to an assumption of 10 minutes for the casual  
conversion process  under the SAJER  bill. It then says : 
In this costing, it is assumed that it would take an employer 15 minutes to address a notification from an employee for 
conversion under the definition. This is slightly higher than the existing conversion pathway    
How was that assumption made?  
Mr Manning :  There 's a slightly more involved process , given that the proposed new definition would require 
a consideration of the totality of the employment relationship. So the 10 minutes that was put in place in relation 
to the current definition was increased by  I know it says 'slightly ' 50 per cent , from 10 minutes to 15 minutes , 
to enable more time , noting that employers are already obliged to properly classify people and , in the case of non -
small -business employers,  make offers . So they need  to do an assessment under the current definition that exists . 
They already have experience both in knowing  what 's going on in the ir workplace and , as I said,  in doing that 
point -in-time assessment , so it was thought that the extra five minutes was a reasonable amount of time  to add . 
Senator CASH:   How was the assumption actually made ? Did you test the assumption ? Did you talk to 
employers of varying sizes et cetera about what they believe th e assumption should be ? Obviously the feedback is 
that it should be far longer , in particular for the smaller sized businesses. I know you said it's a  slightly more 
involved process. Can you take me through what 's part of the 'slightly more ' and, again , how you g ot to five 
minutes ? Did you talk to businesses?  
Ms Williams :  It might be helpful just to talk about wher e that 10 minutes comes  from  and businesses' use of 
that. Obviously the 10 minutes in the regulatory impact statement we did  for the SAJER bill  was part of the 
committee process  for that bill, which took evidence and submissions . During that process, no  concerns were 
raised by employer or union stakeholders with that test. I should also note that that test of 10 minutes was 
something that employers were already familiar with , noting that the provisions that are  currently in the National 
Employment Standards come from the 2018 modern award conversion process. I guess it 's really been a building 
of employers' knowledge of that.  
In terms of whether  we test ed the assumption, we followed the Office of Impact Analysis process , 
consultations were ongoing in terms of the elements of the bill throughout and , noting that the prior 10 minute 
core test had not received any objection or critical feedback  from employers or empl oyees, we just built on the 
knowledge that employers already have.  
Senator CASH:   Again, which businesses did you speak to in relation to adding , essentially , five minutes to 
the old test?  
Ms Williams :  We didn't expressly test any of the assumptions in the impact analysis equivalen t. We used 
prior evidence and methodology and built on that. I think that was a consistent approach across all the impact 
analysis equivalents that the department undertook as part of this bill.  
Senator CASH:   So you relied on that assumption, then, of a slightly more involved process. Was that to 
calculate the total cost to businesses of implementing the new test at $593,055 a year ? That's for all Australian 
businesses employing casual workers ; is that correct?  
Ms Williams :  Just for clarity, could you point out what table that is?  
Senator CASH:   Now I'm going to have to find it  in my notes . 
Ms Williams :  How about I assist.  
Senator CASH:   That's alright. I do have it.  
Ms Williams :  The annual average cost of the measures in the standing up for casuals part of the bill is $1.4 
million   
Senator CASH:   Is that for the whole test , though  not just for the conversion?  
Ms Williams :  Yes. That's for the two elements that we costed. In the costing analysis, we costed two 
elements. One is the  one we 've just been  talking about , which is the notification process , and then we also costed Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 49 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  the element in the bill which is the provision of the casual employment information statement  again , at 12 
months. So the total cost goes to those two things.  
Senator CASH:   And you're saying the total cost was the $1.4 million ? 
Ms Williams :  That's the total cost a cross the economy.  
Senator CASH:   And then that's broken  up into  
Ms Williams :  It's $ 1.1 million for all employers , and then that is broken down into approximately $730,000 
for medium to large employers and $370,000 for small business. The reason for that differentiation is that, to 
access the new employee choice pathway , there are different qualifying periods for small business and larger and 
medium business . That's why you can see  that, for the new employee choice notification process , we've costed 
medium and large business and then small business separately and added those together.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. I'm going to talk generally  now about the regulation impact statements. I'm not 
quite sure who will be able to answer th is, but can you direct me , in the regulation impact statement , to where the 
cost to businesses associated with defending an application , regardless of what application it is , in terms of new 
processes has been accounted for?  
Ms Williams :  In relation to the standing up for casuals measure, we did not cost dispute resolution.  
Senator CASH:   It's called dispute resolution ? 
Ms Williams :  Yes. It is in compliance with the guidelines from the Office of Impact Analysis that that 
element is not costed.  
Senator CASH:   And in relation to the labour hire and , as I put it,  litigating yourself out of a potential order?  
Mr Cains :  In relation to closing the labour hire loophole, there isn't a costing in the RIS, and that is because, 
despite best efforts, there's no way to determine how long, complex or involved a case may be. It's acknowledged 
in the RIS that there would be costs in engaging with an application for an order, but there's no   
Senator CASH:   There's no costing put around that.  
Mr Cains :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   I know you said you 've done it in accordance with the best -practice guidelines. You could 
choose, though, under any piece of legislation to do additional costing though.  
Mr Hehir :  I suppose that goes a little bit to your point earlier . It becomes a question of the veracity of the 
costing at that point. Given that we don't have any real basis  and w e don't even have some core information, it 
becomes quite difficult to establish  what a reliable figure would be . If we had good information, I suspect we 
would have included it in the impact analysis equivalent, but, given we don't, the veracity  would be poor.  
Senator CASH:   You couldn't speak to employers given they are often the ones  who will be defending it in the 
event that , in particular , they provide a contract for service as to what they estimate the cost s will be?  
CHAIR:   [Inaudible]  
Senator CASH:   And then they won't have a cost ; that's exactly right. But , for those who are service 
contractors and have to litigate their way out   
Mr Hehir :  Again, we just don't have a reliable basis for this given that this is a proposed new approach for the 
Fair Work Act . We didn't really have a reliable basis for how long that might be . We're not sure that any of the 
employers would necessarily  have had a reliable basis either. It's not something they'd experience d. It was more 
the fact we didn't have the information that meant we didn't do it. We acknowledge that there 's the possibility of a 
cost there , and I suspect the costs will vary quite dramatically, but   
Senator CASH:   Understood.  
Mr Hehir :  in terms of what the median figure might be, we just had no basis for it.  
Senator CASH:   In relation to the cost to businesses of calculating and applying the protected rate of pay order  
or even just the application being made, has that been accounted for anywhere?  
Mr Tracey :  We do acknowledge that there will be a cost to business attributed to that. We 've been unable to 
quantify that , because , as we've said, from business to business  or from Fair Work Commission order   
Senator CASH:   It could depend on how big you are.  
Mr Tracey :  Indeed.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 50 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Okay. I am  closing labour hire  and going to page 18 of 'Closing the labour hire loophole '. On 
page 18, the top box  says, 'The cost of an employee or union making an application to the Fair Work 
Commission er for an order is currently $83 .80.' Again, how was that figure arrived at?  
Mr Hehir :  That's the application fee.  
Senator CASH:   It says, 'The cost is noted for completeness as it's not able to'  so there 's no other cost 
involved ? That is literally the cost for the application?  
Mr Tracey :  That's right.  
Senator CASH:   That's just to lodge the application. That is the current application fee.  
Mr Tracey :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Was the Fair Work Commission consulted on the possible cost to litigants in relation to, for 
example, the application processes  or defending an application in the event that one is made?  
Mr Tracey :  We did engage with the commission as part of the consultation process . The short answer is , yes, 
we did engage with them.  
Senator CASH:   Was it in relation , in particular, to the issue of costs?  
Mr Tracey :  In relation to costs specifically, we did not that I recall.  
Mr Hehir :  For completeness, I make the same proviso . It's a  new jurisdiction  with a new set of information 
required . I'm not sure what basis the Fair Work Commissioner would have had to test it against . It's not like we 
were amending one of their existing process.  
Senator CASH:   No, I understand that ; it's more that they do deal with this all the time and you said that it 
could vary depending on length. They obviously are experienced in this.  
In terms of smaller businesses and small businesses that are not exempt from parts of the legislation , has the 
department under taken any modelling analysis on how the cost burden may impact the viability small businesses?  
Mr Hehir :  No. Again, without actually knowing what their margins are what their profitability is  we're not 
able to do that calculation.  
Senator CASH:   I want to ask some general questions on the department's engagement with Treasury to advise 
on the economic productivity and jobs impact of the measure. I know that , obviously , the c losing loopholes bill 
will implement changes across the economy . The explanatory memorandum on the regulatory impact statement 
provide no whole -of-economy modelling. Is that something that Treasury was asked to do . Is it something that 
was considered to be done in terms of the ultimate impact on GDP, sectoral growth, jobs growth, productivity, 
real wages et cetera?  
Mr Hehir :  I'd probably need to take that on notice. I know w e had discussions with Treasury ; I just need to 
take notice the detail of those discussions. In general , Treasury have the same data limitations that we do , so i t's 
quite difficult. The actual across -the-economy impact in terms of the transfer between a business and the ir 
employe e I'm not sure how that actually works. The vast majority of this is estimated to be a business paying a 
work er more , so there 's still the same amount of cash in the economy overall . That  is, the regulatory costs are 
quite low for this.  
Senator CASH:   Is that b ased on all the qualifications and the assumptions  that are in  I know we 'll pursue 
this in other hearings , but is that based on what the assumptions are in the regulatory impact statement ? 
Mr Hehir :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   Did the department consider undertaking any economic modelling of the proposed  measures ? 
Mr Hehir :  We did not for economywide modelling . We looked  at what the impact was in particular sectors, 
and it's largely that transfer between what a business is charging  and what a business has to pay the worker. In 
terms of the actual impact on total spend across the economy, it's difficult to see  an impact . 
Mr Manning :  Generally, it has been accepted through a number of tranches of industrial relations changes 
that specific outcomes will depend on the approach independent actors  such as employers, unions or the 
commission take  in response to measures . The other thing with noting is that it can be difficult to isolate the 
impact of an individual measure from other external fact ors that are driving changes in the overall economic 
climate.  
Mr Hehir :  It's the most difficult part in terms of doing economywide modelling . There are so many other 
factors  that are in  place that  including how the participants within the system respond to the actual changes  is 
really hard to model.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 51 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   A number of employers have come out and said , 'We estimate that the impact of , say,  a 
particular measure will be  X,' and they're obviously quite high.  Do you then speak to them and ask how they came 
up with that particular  figure ? 
Mr Hehir :  In all our consultations with them , we ask them , when they were quoting figures , to provide the 
assumptions , the basis or the calculations for that.  
Mr Manning :  And it is worth noting that , if we speak generally about those two or three submissions, for 
example , in relation to the minimum standard s orders, the submission  that was made to the inquiry   
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Manning :  I think it's fair to say we  were  probably a little surprised by the range within it , in the sense that 
some were talking 85 per cent  and some  were  talking 260 per cent. Also, I'm curious as to  what that means and 
what it takes into account . If you 're saying , 'If we have to pay them the same as employees on an award , we're 
going to increase our costs by a hundred pe r cent ,' then you're clearly paying a lot less than what might be there. 
That's not our assumption, w hen you look at the regulatory impact statement. What that drives homes is that the 
detail s, in terms of exactly what they  were including  the times  and other factors  weren 't included in those 
submissions.  
Senator CASH:   Can I ask which submissions you're referring to?  
Mr Manning :  In particular I'm thin king of the minimum standard orders  Uber , DoorDash and Menulog . I 
think  all had either  a percentage or a dollar figure increase on what it would cost. What's common to the three of 
them is that , when you look at the minimum standards objective , there are 15 provisions in the objective and 
about 23 different factors that the Fair Work Commission has to balance , and t hey focused on one of them and 
reached the conclusion that you're being asked to pay them exactly the same as an employee  getting penalty 
rates on a Sunday, for example  and then add on all the other costs. That's not the task the Fair Work 
Commission's being asked to do. Certainly they're being asked to set a minimum rate and to take into account 
what an employe e doing comparable work would get  to look at the costs et cetera. But they're being asked to 
look at a whole range of factors , including not giving preference to one business model or working arrangement 
over another ; being tailored to the sector ; being tailored to the regulated worker preferences ; being tailored to the 
type of wor k; and being tailored to work arrangements . They have to take into account the need to avoid 
unreasonable adverse impact s on competition, business viability, innovation  and productivity. Looking  at the 
whole range of factors , I don't think it 's credible th at they would just look at one or two and come up with the 
types of numbers that were cited in those submissions.  
Senator CASH:   No, and thank you for that. Going back to the department's engagement with other agencies, I 
want to turn to the impact of collective agreements and supply chain changes. Did the department seek and/or 
obtain the ACCC's views in relation to the effect of those provisions on competition  or competition law?  
Mr Hehir :  I'd need to check whether we spoke to the ACCC. We did speak to the policy agency   
Senator CASH:   In the ACCC or   
Mr Hehir :  No. Treasury is the policy agency. So, yes, we have engaged with Treasury around that.  
Senator CASH:   About this particular part of the bill?  
Mr Hehir :  I might just pass to   
Mr Manning :  We did different consultations on different parts , and Mr Jone s might speak to the minimum 
standard orders and the road transport safety orders consultation.  
Mr Jones :  I might just try and find my brie fing on that , but we certainly spoke to Treasury a number of times. 
I'd have to take a second to look through my notes to see whether we spoke to the ACCC.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you , I appreciate that. I'll a lso ask : did the department engage with the Productivity 
Commission in relation to the effect of the legislation on productivity?  
Mr Manning :  There was a conversation with the ACCC.  
Senator CASH:   Fabulous. When did that occur?  
Mr Manning :  November 2022.  
Senator CASH:   What was the discussion with the ACCC back then? That's obviously a long way   
Mr Manning :  There have been 10 subsequent meetings with Treasury. This is just on the minimum standard 
orders and road transport safety orders.  
Senator CASH:   There have been 10 subsequent meetings with Treasury, did you say?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 52 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Manning :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   What were the meetings in relation to?  
Mr Jones :  I'd have to take detail on notice, but certainly it was about the broad policy settings for the 
'employee -like' measure  and the road transport measure , and unfair contracts as well.  
Mr Manning :  They're the responsible agency for competition policy   
Senator CASH:   Correct.  
Mr Manning :  So it was directed at that. 
Mr Jones :  And we certainly discussed competition policy a number of times in those meetings.  
Senator CASH:   I will just go  to this part of the EM and the bill . Is it correct that collective agreements can be 
negotiated and agreed exclusively between two parties and then applied to all participants in their supply chain , 
meaning that the terms and conditions of work can be set by the head contractor and whatever union they might 
be negotiating with?  
Mr Jones :  The consent to collective  agreements would be made between a registered organisation and the 
business , but only in relation to the terms and conditions of the contractors who are working directly to them.  
Mr Manning :  So, no, they  can't bind all the participants  in the length of the chain . 
Senator CASH:   Right. T ake me through , then,  the issues that have arisen in relation to supply chain 
participants and the potential to have their conditions regulated . 
Mr Jones :  The road transport provisions , as they are in the bill , include the power to make regulations to have 
contractual chain orders . 
Senator CASH:   That's where it is.  
Mr Jones :  Those provisions are regulations  in the bill  at the moment. It's not actually setting them out, but it 
allows regulations to be made that can give the Fair Work Commission the power to consider contractual chains , 
as well as an individual contract or. 
Senator CASH:   Understood . Now it's making sense. Thank you for that. As you said , the collective 
agreement itself is negotiated at this level  not at this other  level . When you say 'a regulatory power ', what does 
that mean?  
Mr Jones :  A regulation -making power.  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Mr Jones :  A regulation would need to be made in order to enable it.  
Senator CASH:   Is that on a case-by-case basis , though ? 
Mr Manning :  We should clarify that that's a regulation -making power to allow the Fair Work Commission to 
make contractual chain orders , not a regulation power in relation to collective agreements in relation to 
contractual chains.  
Senator CASH:   Exactly. So take me through them.  
Mr Manning :  All th ose guardrails that the Fair Work Commission has to establish  an order in the road 
transport industry would apply in those situations. There's not a regulation -making power that envisages a 
regulation being  established that could  turn o ff contractual chain  collective agreements . 
Senator CASH:   And would allow a contractual chain order.  
Mr Manning :  That's right. That's not envisaged.  
Senator CASH:   In what circumstances would you make a contractual chain order?  
Mr Jones :  That would depend on the final make -up of those regulations . As I said , they're not in there at the 
moment. It's a decision for government as to whether  they want to make those.  
Mr Manning :  Certainly we 're aware of submissions to the inquiry from road transport operators who believe 
that there should be the ability on the face of the legislation to make contractual chain orders in order to protect 
the viability of , for example , owner -drivers in the contractual chain.  
Senator CASH:   Say that again . I missed that.  
Mr Manning :  I'm aware of seeing reporting around submissions to the inquiry the committee has underway 
that say: ' Instead of having a regulation -making power that could , if you like , turn on a jurisdiction for the Fair 
Work Commission should a need subsequently arise, let's put it on the face of the legislation. ' Some people think 
it should be something that the commission can do.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 53 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   That means the collective agreement would   
Mr Manning :  No collective agreement . The  only way the act envisages contractual chains being subject to an 
order is by an order of the Fair Work Commission , not through collective agreements.  
Senator CASH:   Who  would make the application for the contractual chain order?  
Mr Manning :  Again, it's something that would have to be determined  in the regulations.  
Senator CASH:   In the regulation . 
Mr Jones :  Correct.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Will  the regulation be tabled?  
Mr Manning :  I don't know if there will be a regulation.  
Senator CASH:   When say you don't know, w hat does that mean?  
Mr Manning :  There's a regulation -making power , but there'd have to be a subsequent conscious decision   
Senator CASH:   By the government   
Mr Manning :  to develop the regulation.  
Senator CASH:   to actually put that in.  
Mr Manning :  And then it would be a disallowable instrument , in the way regulations are.  
Senator CASH:   In terms, then, of what's been raised, say, by way of the submissions about  the collective 
agreement being able to bring in a supply chain , that  basically c ould only happen  if there was the contractual 
chain order . 
Mr Manning :  That's  right . Under  the framework  that is there  at the moment, the only way it's envisaged that 
there could be an application of a standard throughout a contractual chain  is if  
Senator CASH:   That's what I want to explore. Take me through that . 
Mr Manning :  It would only be if a regulation was made that permitted it  and if, then , an application was 
made to the commission and  if the commission , having heard evidence from both sides   
Senator CASH:   Then decides  that it could.  
Mr Manning :  decided that, yes   
Senator CASH:   Yes. U nderstood.  
Mr Manning :  But, as you would imagine, they'd have to be very   
Senator CASH:   But you've got to go down the path of t he contractual chain order . 
Mr Manning :  That's right.  
Senator CASH:   Understood.  
Mr Manning :  Not a contractual chain; a collective agreement, which is   
Senator CASH:   Now I understand, absolutely. There has also been another issue raised in some of the 
submissions. I 'll raise the issue and you can comment on it. What is the purpose of exempting collective 
agreements , the making of them and minimum standard s orders and guidelines from certain competition laws?  
Mr Manning :  I'll get M r Jones to explain, but it 's essentially to enable them to be made because it's possible 
in the normal event that , if two parties come together and reach agreement   
Senator CASH:   It would be collusion.  
Mr Manning :  it could contravene competition laws.  
Senator CASH:   Yes, understood.  
Mr Hehir :  I might just step back to the sort of first principle. My recollection is that there's an exemption 
from the competition laws for award setting   
Senator CASH:   Correct . Absolutely.  
Mr Hehir :  and enterprise agreements, so it's in line with that practice. It's not actually set out in the EM as to 
why it 's in place, but my understanding is that it 's recognising that employment and payment arrangements  
shouldn't be subject to competition law.  
Senator CASH:   So that's the purpose of exempting them.  
Ms Godden :  It's e xtending that longstanding exemption for collective bargaining and collective standard  
setting for wages and other key terms and conditions of employment to this independent contracting space Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 54 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  because that's what these provisions are really looking at. The minister has been talking about the cliff of 
employee terms and conditions then drop ping down to independent contractor terms and conditions. It's about 
turning that more into a ramp. That collective agreement setting process is part of that. The minimum standards 
orders are part of that. So it's very much analogous, if you like, in situation, so it's extending the existing 
exemption in the Competition and Consumer Act to these provisions.  
Senator CASH:   Did you have discussions with the ACCC in relation to this extension?  
Mr Jones :  We certainly had a meeting with the ACCC, but most of the discussions about these exemptions 
would have been run through the policy agency, which  is Treasury.  
Senator CASH:   So the discussions were with Treasury?  
Mr Jones :  Yes. And we did have extensive discussions with them.  
Senator CASH:   You did?  
Mr Jones :  Yes. 
Mr Manning :  Those are the 10 meetings I refe rred to previously.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. I might get the dates of those meetings on notice.  
Mr Manning :  Certainly.  
Senator CASH:   Is it generally the case that prices increase where competition laws do not apply and there is 
less competition?  
Mr Hehir :  It's hard to speculate, and I think there would have to be speculation. I'm not aware of any data. I 
would need  to take it on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Obviously then the services would decline.  
Mr Hehir :  I think you 're talking about competition theory. There 's certainly a competition theory that says 
that competition causes either quality to increase or price to decrease, or a mixture of both. That's theory. I need to 
check and see what the evidence base is. Part of your question was about where the laws don't apply, so I'm not 
sure what the counterfactual is in those circumstances if they haven't applied.  
Mr Manning :  We just discussed the exemption for wages. They didn't increase for a long period.  
Mr Hehir :  The exemption for wages has been around for a very long time. I suppose there are certain points 
where governments make a decision about where and how competition policy should apply. There are examples 
of where that has been done previously. Again this is a recollection which I 'll test, but there were amendments at 
some point in the last decade that actually allowed the ACCC to enable a group of small businesses to negotiate 
together.  
Senator CASH:   They 're small businesses?  
Mr Hehir :  Yes. So you 've got a really big business   
Senator CASH:   And then smaller businesses.  
Mr Hehir :  and smaller businesses. It's okay at various points for them to be exempted  in that example I 
think through an active approach by the ACCC  from those particular aspects of competition law.  I'm not sure 
when that amendment was made . I think it was  sometime in the last five or six years , but I could be slightly 
wrong  on that . 
Senator CASH:   Without the exemptions that you've referred to, if you undertook this conduct, you would be 
in breach, wouldn't you, and you 'd would face a fine ? 
Mr Hehir :  It would be a question of whether you could use the existing process of seeking authority from the 
ACCC not to. You're not necessarily in breach.  There are some processes that could be followed.  
Ms Godden :  It's possible that the existing very broad base small -business authorisation  might cover it, 
because of course independent contractors are small businesses ; however, that process is put in place under the 
ACCC's authorisation power. I 'd have to take the exact details of that on notice , but I certainly recall some 
concerns in consultation s about it not being a legislative exemption  that, because it was seen as more of an 
administrative measure, my recollection is that some concerns were raised about relying on it.  
Mr Jones :  One thing I might add  and I wouldn't call myself a competition expert  is I understand that in 
terms of competition law  all the thresholds are about a substantial reduction in competition across the economy , 
which is the threshold for action under those , and i n some circumstances that might not be met by some of these 
things.  
Ms Godden :  And t hat would depend whether the offences were per se or were  subject to the competition rule.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 55 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Exactly, yes. But it could cover independent contractors , is what you're saying,  by the 
extension of the current settings.  
Ms Godden :  And of course  there are already provisions in the Competition and Consumer Act that could be 
utilised. There 's the notification process , which  allows you to get an exemption from selected parts of part IV of 
the Competition and Consumer Act , and t here's also the process for seeking an authorisation more broadly that 
could be available to people . When we talk about competition policy and in particular part IV of the Competition 
and Consumer Act, there is already a recognition in that legislation that in some circumstances the public interest 
will permit or make it desirable for some people to get exemptions from those prohibitions , and that 's my 
understanding of what the notification authorisation process is designed to do. I should say that the Competition 
and Consumer Act belongs to the Treasury under the Administrative Arrangements Orders   
Senator CASH:   No, no, I understand that.  
Ms Godden :  but that's  my understanding.  
Senator CASH:   If the contractual chain order is put in place and an owner -driver says , 'I don't want to be part 
of it', what then happens?  
Mr Jones :  Sorry, c ould you repeat that question . 
Senator CASH:   Say the  contract ual chain order i s put in place and an owner -driver  says, ' Actually , I don't  
want to be part of it . I want to still do my own thing ', is there an exit clause for them?  
Mr Jones :  It probably would depend on the final nature of any regulations that would be made  to enable the 
contract chain orders .  
Mr Manning :  If the framework for orders is put in place then the commission  would have a hearing and 
parties would be able to come to it and put their view . I don't think we can go further and say  what the outcome  
would be . 
Ms Godden :  We're still quite a few steps away from any punitive contractual chain order . One thing that 
might be helpful is paragraph 1019 of the explanatory memorandum , on page 174, which sets out the types of 
regulations that could possibly be made under section 40J. That was designed to give people some guidance about 
the sorts of regulations that might be able to be made . It includ es, for example : 
  empower the FWC to make road transport industry contractual chain orders, that confer rights and impose obligations on 
road transport industry contractual chain participants;  
  specify the matters that a road transport industry contractual chain order must, may or must not deal with;  
  empower the FWC to vary, suspend or revoke road transport industry contractual chain orders;  
And it goes on. That provide s some useful context about that regulation -making power  and gives you some idea 
of why we 're struggling to say what a contractual chain order may or may not permit you to do.  
Senator CASH:   There are a number of considerations. Who grants the exemption under the Competition and 
Consumer Act  at present? Is it the ACCC?  
Ms Godden :  Are you talking about the existing small -business authorisation?  
Senator CASH:   Yes. 
Ms Godden :  I might need to take some of the details  on notice.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine. I understand.  
Ms Godden :  I'm so sorry. It 's quite a few months since I have looked  at  
Senator CASH:   No, no, you're doing incredibly well.  
Ms Godden :  It's quite complex. M y recollection  and I will undertake to confirm this on notice  is that  
there 's a broad -based , 10-year authorisation for collective  bargaining by small businesses. My recollection  and 
I'm really reaching  here  
Senator CASH:   No, no, you're doing well.  
Ms Godden :  is that I don't think any of those small businesses can have a turnover of over $10 million per 
annum at the time they put a notice in to the ACCC that they 're using that small -business authorisation. My 
recollection is that the ACCC has a register of when people are using it , and that register sets out the parties and 
the scope of what they 're proposing to do under that authorisation. But I do apologise ; I'm going to have to take 
the exact date the authorisation was made and the scope of it  on notice . 
Senator CASH:   That's fine.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 56 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Godden :  It is available on the ACCC's website , because that 's where I got all my information about it 
originally , but it's just not at the top of my memory at the moment.  
Senator CASH:   Going back to Mr Manning's evidence, I asked  if there was  an ability to get -out option for an 
owner -driver to escape a collective agreement  that they didn't themselves make . You said   
Mr Manning :  Contract chain order.  
Senator CASH:   Contract chain order  that t hey'd go to the Fair Work Commission and present the 
arguments as to why they should not be included. But t he issue then becomes : if it's made therein.  
Mr Manning :  It's jumping a bit far ahead in the sense that , as Ms Godden outlined,  the entire framework 
under the regulation -making powers still has to be made . Should that ever happen and an application be made, the 
commission would run a hearing in the normal way , and, in resolving that, they would , you would think, provide 
certainty as to who 's captured and who 's not . But I'm unable to  talk about a particular hypothetical.  
Senator CASH:   That's not a problem at all.  
CHAIR:   Thanks, Senator Cash. I just want to ask a couple of questions. At the Launceston hearing on this bill 
we heard from the Flight Attendants Association and some Qantas flight attendants  and this is  how the scenario 
goes. Qantas hires its flight attendants through 19 different internal and external companies, all on different rates 
of pay. You can well imagine a situation where supervisors are being paid less than people they are supervising 
because of who they are employed  by. Ms de Wilt , a Qantas flight attendant, said she didn't find out she was n't 
employed by Qantas until four months after she started. She didn't find out that she wasn't employed directly by 
Qantas in the main line  until four months after she 'd started. She thought she 'd been employed by Qantas. She 
said: 
 It's quite disheartening, quite confusing, a little bit demoralising, knowing that you're there on the cart doing the same t hing 
  You are cleaning up the vomit on the floor alongside somebody else. You were doing 19 -hour duty and keeping your eyes 
open and keeping each other awake the same as everyone else    
Ms de Wilt may be earning as much as 50 per cent less than direct Qantas employees for the same job. I don't 
know how anyone could  look Ms de Wilt  in the eye and tell her that she deserves to be ripped off by Alan Joyce 
in that way, but isn't that exactly what 's being  proposed  by those opposed to  this bill?  This is to Senator Watt.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, that is what this bill comes down to . I think  those who do intend to vote against this 
legislation do need to  explain to Ms de Wilt and the many thousands of other  workers out there who  are 
experiencing that why they think that 's okay.  Earlier in the day I was making the point that in Australia we 've 
believed in a day's pay for a fair day's wor k, and unfortunately loopholes  in the laws  allow  people like Ms de Wilt 
to be paid  did you say 50 per cent less ? 
CHAIR:   Up to 50 per cent less.  
Senator Watt:   Up to 50 per cent less than the people she's working alongside. Either we  fix that or we don't. 
Either  we support workers like her and her colleagues getting  paid fairly or we support the companies who are, 
frankly, ripping them off and keeping wages down. So I'd  say to  any senator who 's still making up their mind  
about how they're going to vote on this that these are  the real -life consequences of these laws and that 's why we 
need to fix them.  
CHAIR:   Of course, Ms de Wilt  was carrying out the same role as other people . She describes cleaning up 
vomit like everyone else  and keeping each other awake for 19 hours, with  supervisors getting paid less than the 
people they 're supervising because they're employed by one of the 19 companies that Qantas has subcontracted 
to either companies it fully or partially owns  or companies it doesn't own.  How important is this to Ms de Wilt  
and to other Qantas employees ? What would you say to those Qantas employees  about the importance of this bill? 
Senator Watt:   I'd say to them that this  bill is all about ensuring  that they are paid fairly , and I hope that Ms de 
Wilt and others like her are making contact with the senators who are still making up their minds about how 
they're going to vote, because it will have real implications for the take -home pay of workers  like her. Earlier 
today , there was a  bit of a  discussion about the cost of these changes , and I know all sorts of claims have been 
made about the cost of these changes to the economy. The cost will be to employers like Qantas , who are making 
very large profits on the back s of workers like Ms de Wilt . It's a question of whether that money stays in the 
hands of Qantas and its shareholders or whether it goes in the pockets of very low -paid workers like Ms de Wilt . I 
think the way to get the economy moving again is to give people like her a bit more spending power in the 
economy that we live in.  
CHAIR:   There is this critical question about how we deal with the cost -of-living challenges . This is one of the 
critical areas  where  we can deal with cost of living challenges . Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 57 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   Absolutely.  We all know that Australians are doing it tough at the moment . The government 
has always acknowledge d that. We're obviously taking a range of steps  to try to provide relief : cheaper child care 
cheaper medicine s, energy relief and those kinds of things. But a really  important component of helping people 
with cost -of-living pressures is making sure they're  being paid decently so they can pay their bills . The way the se 
laws exist at the moment allow s employers like Qantas to manipulate wage systems to keep wages down , and 
that's making it much harder for low -paid workers to deal with the cost -of-living pressures. So anyone out there 
who's saying they care a bout cost of living should be helping us fix these loopholes.  
CHAIR:   The intent is , then,  to close down what  I would describe as the Alan Joyce -Qantas loophole that has 
being gamed to knock out some of those hardworking people like Ms de Wilt . When agreements are struck , 
they're struck on the basis that that's  what applies to the work and to  that particular sector or company or that 
particular arrangement. But then people  find themselves undercut . It just beggars belief that  someone can be 
employed under one arrangement and somebody else  can be paid so little . In the case of Ms de Wilt  and she 
wasn't the only one in this situation  she described how  they thought they were working for Qantas,  only to find 
out they were working for  one of the  many subsidiaries and getting  substantially  different rates of pay . They were 
literally wiping vomit of f the floor of the aeroplane in the same way as everybody else but  getting very different 
rates of pay.  
Senator Watt:   Yes. I don't think I've  heard anyone  who's  opposing this bill try to justify that , and I 'd invite 
them to do so . I'd invite them to justify why workers like her can get paid up to 50 per cent less to, as you say , 
wipe up vomit right next to someone else who's getting paid more than them. The whole foundation of our 
work place  relations system is that employers enter agreements with their workers . My view is that it should be 
with a union involved . That's probably your view as well . But there 's a direct relationship , and what we have seen 
is the emergence of these other arrangements that some employers are taking on to get around that system  and 
undercut the very agreements  that they enter into . That's just plain wrong.  
CHAIR:   That causes a spiral down in the aviation sector to o, because  it means that  companies that are trying 
to do the right thing  are competing with companies that will do anything to game the system.  
Senator Watt:   Exactly, yes. Companies who are doing the right thing are being undercut by people who are 
manipulating the system. That's not good for business and it's not good for the economy, let alone the impact on 
workers.  
CHAIR:   Senator Grogan.  
Senator GROGAN:   We've seen in relation to this bill quite a significant negative campaign run by some of 
the large associations, particularly the Minerals Council. As we've gone through these hearings, what we 're seeing 
over and over again is businesses coming to the table expressing deep concerns about the impact s, and then, as we 
talk them through the actuality of what's going to happen and what the impact is actually going to be on their 
business, they're going, 'Oh, well, that won't affect me.' I'm really quite concerned about this.  
We've got a couple of examples from those hearings. The Lynas CEO, Amanda Lacaze, said at the end of the 
hearing , 'Yes, I do accept that today, potentially, there is no effect on the business. ' We've had people coming over 
and over again with this kind of approach. CEO Mr Iustini from Technical Resources ended up agreeing again 
that his business would n't be impacted either.  I myself last week in South Australia was at a business for um where 
people were lined up to talk to me about this , saying , 'This is going to cost me a fortune, because I'm going to 
have to put all my casuals onto permanent ,' and all of this twaddle that has been put out to the public. I think it is 
deeply, deeply concerning that people are progressing on the basis of complete misinformation.  
For the purposes of businesses in South Australia, so I can send this little clip around, Ms James, I wonder if 
you could step out for me very, very clearly, in your position as the secretary of the department, with no fear or 
favour, exactly what is in the legislation. Can you explain the new process for casual conversion? This is the 
biggest issue I am hearing about. What is the process for casual conversion?  
Ms James :  There are a number of measures in this bill, and many of them are quite targeted to particular 
situations or particular scenario s, so for many businesses they wouldn't be relevant. In the case of the casual 
conversion provisions, they are, obviously, potentially more relevant, because casuals are engaged across many, 
many industries. I will ask the team to step you through it, in part because the provisions in the bill do build on 
the existing provisions that were introduced into the legislation by the last government. What we've done in 
working with the government to implement their election commitment is to try, as much as possible, to maintain 
those parts of the framework that were consistent with the election commitment and that worked. This is 
something that we talked about a lot in the consultations. We then changed some of the mechanics around the 
pathways through to conversion.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 58 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  The one thing I'll emphasise before I hand over to the team is: it is all about choice. No casual worker will be 
converted without their choice. Employment contracts are agreements, and you need to agree to that kind of 
change as an employee. If an employee is working, as I did, in retail as a student and wants the casual loading , 
wants to retain that arrangement, is happy with the casual hours and isn't interested at that point in leave or 
superannuation  although they'll all learn those things are important  they can happily remain on that 
arrangement . What the bill is establishing is, for casual workers who are engaged in more ongoing arrangements , 
pathways to choose to convert under certain circumstances. I 'll hand over to the team to lay  out those pathways.  
Senator GROGAN:   For clarity, you are saying that casuals will not be forced or automatically transitioned 
from casual to permanent ? That's what people are hearing  will happen . 
Ms James :  The legislation does not allow for any sort of automatic transferring or converting. It has to be by 
agreement, and it has to be quite a deliberate choice on behalf of the employee. There are measures in the bill to 
ensure people are informed so they are making an informed and deliberate choice.  
Mr Still :  To reemphasise that point,  section 15A(5) of the proposed provisions makes it very clear that a 
person's status as an employee cannot change unless a particular event happens. Those events, as the secretary has 
mentioned, are driven by employee choice.  
In terms of the new provisions that enable employees to indicate that they would like to choose to change their 
status to non -casual, as the secretary mentioned, the existing provisions around casual conversion that are already 
in the act will be maintained. That pathway, which has existed now for a couple of years, will remain in place. 
That, in essence , requires employers to make an assessment of the pattern of work the employee has worked after 
12 months of employment and in certain circumstances to notify the employee that they have a right to convert. In 
addition to that, it gives employees a right to notify that their pattern of work is sufficiently regular in certain 
circumstances. All of that existing infrastructure is maintained.  
In addition to that, though, and in keeping with the introduction of a more objective definition of casual 
employment that looks to the actual circumstances of employment, not merely the terms of the contract, the 
provisions allow an employee who believes that the circumstances of their employment have changed over 
time so that if their employment were assessed against the definition now, it would be assessed as not being 
casual  to notify that to the employer  after six months of employment. If the employer agrees that their status has 
changed under the definition, then their status will be changed. The provisions provide for consultation with the 
employee to help the employee understand the consequences of that and what might or might not need to change 
in their employment and so forth. In many circumstances, it will be a pretty straightforward process: the employee 
will say, 'I think my status has changed,' and then either the employer will say, 'I don't agree,' and have a 
conversation about that, or the employer will agree, and the parties will work through what will need to change in 
that person's employment.  
Of course, it is possible that there might be disagreement about the status . The provisions, importantly, do 
provide dispute resolution pathways to resolve that kind of disagreement. As is common in the Fair Work Act , the 
emphasis is on first trying to resolve disputes in the workplace  the cheapest, fastest way of doing it and the one 
that's most in line with workplace needs  and then it escalates in a staged fashion. If you can't sort it out in the 
workplace, you can go to the Fair Work Commission, who will attempt firstly to conciliate or use some other 
alternative dispute resolution means to resolve the dispute. In the end , as a last resort, they will arbitrate the matter 
and determine the employee's status on the basis of what is fair and reasonable in the circumstances, having 
regard to the tests. That is a high-level  take. I wonder if my colleague could add anything.  
Ms Williams :  All I would say is that for employers and employees the core test remains consistent with what 
is in the legislation now. A casual employee is one that has no firm advance commitment to continuing and 
indefinite work. As is the situation now, employers and employees at the point of engagement will need to make 
an assessment against that definition. At that point, provided the casual employee is appropriately classified, small 
businesses have no further obligations on them in relation to conversion unless an employee comes to them about 
it. That employee will stay casual. They can't be forced to change. If the employee raises their hand and says, 
'Hey, I want to change; can you please have a look at my status,'  then they will need to look at it.  
For medium to large businesses, at 12 months of employment, as they do now, employers will need to have a 
look at their status and make them an offer of conversion if appropriate. To go to the evidence around that, we 
were talking earlier about the statutory review of the current provisions. One of the things that review found was 
that that employer off er mechanism which is already there in the legislation and working now is really important 
for employees who may not feel that they can raise that issue with their employers. It's continuing that obligation 
that all employers have to make sure their workers are appropriately classified and  they are fulfilling their 
obligations in line with the legislation.  As the secretary said, we 've undertaken extensive consultations on this, Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 59 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  and there was generally consistent feedback from both employer representatives and employee representatives, as 
was found in the review as well, that that current conversion framework was working well and that it should stay.  
Senator GROGAN:   Thank you.  
CHAIR:   Senator Payman.  
Senator PAYMAN:   On that line of questioning, can you confirm whether employers w ill be liable for back  
pay if a casual employee wants to convert to permanent?  
Mr Still :  In general, employers won't be liable  for back  pay. There are a number of reasons for that. Back  pay 
can only arise whe re you've been misclassified , and t he provisions make it clear that employment status will be 
set o n commencement of employment and then will not change  until one of the events listed in new section 
15A(5) occurs . Unlike the scenario prior to the High Court Rossato case , where the definition could apply at any 
point in time and change a person's status without the parties necessarily knowing , which would lead to a 
potential underpayment for a period of time , these provisions  are not self -executing . They will only apply when a 
status change event occurs.  If an employee is correctly classified at the commencement of employment, it 's 
simply impossible for that kind of misclassification related  underpayment to arise.  
There is, of course, a test for whether you're a casual or not. It is possible under the revised test, as it is under 
the existing act, to get it wrong. An important point to make there is that, even where an employer does 
misunderstand the test and get it wrong and an underpayment arises, the existing provision in section 545A of the 
act will continue to apply. The government isn't proposing that that be changed. That provision provides that, 
where an employee has received a casual loading or an identifiable rate of pay in respect of being a casual and it 
turns out that they're not a casual, that loading that they've been paid should be offset against whatever the 
underpayment might have been. In many circumstances, that will either very substantially or completely offset the 
potential underpayment liability.  
Senator PAYMAN:   Thank you, Mr Still.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I have a follow -up question to the line of questioning from Senator Grogan . Senator 
Grogan  said that the biggest issue that she 's heard through the inquiry is about the casual conversion. I disagree on 
that point. I think the biggest issue   
Senator Watt:   I'll stop you there, Senator. I think what Senator Grogan said was that that was the biggest 
issue she was hearing in her community, rather than in the inquiry.  
Senator GROGAN:   And I don't think it's your place to disagree with the fact that that's my experience in my 
community.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   No, I have a different point of view, which was my point. The big issue with the 
casual point is the definition and not so much the conversion. Most of the evidence we've received has suggested 
that very few people, ultimately, while they have the right to convert, don't actually seek to. So the issue is with 
the definition.  
Senator GROGAN:   Just for clarity on the record, my providing my opinion and my experience is not for you 
to disagree with. That's what my community is concerned about. You may not think it's an issue, but my 
community does.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's right, and we both have different points of view. My point of view is that the 
feedback is around the definition, so can you explain to us and step us through the difference between the current 
definition and what the new definition is and how that is going to impact employing  casuals?  
Mr Hehir :  To check, you're talking about the definition on commencement?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   At commencement.  
Mr Still :  I'll probably be, necessarily, a little bit high level because there are some minor differences that are 
probably not so material. As I mentioned earlier in the proceedings, some of the core elements are similar, and 
some things have changed.  The core element that 's similar between  both tests is  that casual employment will be 
characterised by the absence of a firm advance commitment to continuing and indefinite employment. That is  a 
feature of  existing  section  15A and the proposed new  section  15A. Like the existing definition , the proposed new 
definition  also then  provides some  factors that can be considered  in assessing whether or not there's an absence of 
firm advance commitment . But, as with  the existing definition,  all of th ose factors go to assessing that central 
question of firm  advance commitment. There are some changes . I won't  mention  them all, but p robably the most 
significant   Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 60 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   There are three pages  of them . 
Mr Still :  I'll talk to the most significant changes. The most significant change is that the definition that 's 
presently in the act is confined wholly to the terms of the contract that are entered into at  commencement of 
employment , whereas the new definition , as set out in proposed section 15A(2), looks to the contract as an 
important source of the  understanding between the parties but isn't limited to the contract. It looks to the practical 
reality of the relationship, so it looks to,  for example, things the parties have said to each other outside of the 
contract  but also t he way that they 've actually behaved in executing the contract . It looks not  just to what the legal 
contract was at the beginning  of the relationship  but also  to what people really understood the situation to be and 
how it 's played out in practice.  That is the most important change . I think that's what the government were  getting 
at when they said that they'd  be interested in an objective definition. What was meant by that , I think, is  putting in 
place a definition that  looks to  the lived reality of the relationship between the employer and the employee.  
There are a number of other changes , and I 'll call out one or two more. One is that the payment of a casual 
loading under the existing definition is one of the factors in looking to the firm advance commitment. This test 
has promoted that factor into the core test , so you cannot be a casual unless you are entitled to be paid a casual 
loading or a specific rate of pay for being casual. That 's in recognition of the important entitlements that an 
employee does not receive if they choose to become a casual employee.  
Secondly, the existing test talked about 'firm advance commitment to continuing and indefinite work  according 
to an agreed pattern of work '. That agreed pattern of work has been removed from the test . Pattern of work is still 
relevant  it's mentioned in the factors  but it's  been removed from the core test. I think the minister has said that  
that's  reflective of changes in the modern workplace within the last few decades , where ongoing staff actually 
have quite considerable flexibility in the way they perform their hours. It may be that nobody or very few people 
have a truly strict regularity in the hours they work , and so the government's taken the view that that focus on the 
pattern of work isn't appropriate to any longer be in the core test.  
The other factor I 'd briefly mention is that the provisions do provide that , if you r contract of employment  
provides  that it will  end at the end of  an identifiable period , you cannot be casual , unless the contract is for 
seasonal work . That's to essentially manage the interaction between the definition of 'casual ' and the fixed -term 
provisions that are elsewhere in the act.  
There are a range of minor drafting differences and slight differences in the way that factors are set up , but I 
suppose I 'd summarise by saying that there 's significant commonality in the core of the test and a significant 
change in the circumstances that you take into account in assessing the test.  
Ms Williams :  I would just add, Senator O'Sullivan, picking  up on Mr Hehir 's point,  that I think your question 
was going to  engagement , and there has been some confusion about how the test will work between engagement 
and then later, when an employee m ay exercise their choice to  change status.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The c oncern  seems  to be at the front end.  Is that where the main concern seems to 
be? 
Ms Williams :  Obviously , at the point that someone is engaged, you can only look at the information that goes 
to the relationship that you have at that point in time . At the point someone  is engaged, one of the key factors  
really, the central factor  that you would have as to the substance of that relationship and the practical reality of 
that relationship is the contract. You would not have had, of course, a period of post -contractual conduct because, 
indeed, at that point in time   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You've just started.  
Ms Williams :  you've just started. Mr Still's outlined that the element of the objective test that the government 
is trying to get up there is incorporating post -contractual condu ct. But, of course, you can only assess post -
contractual conduct when it has occurred. So, at engagement , you look at the contract , and there may be some 
other mutual understandings discussions that you've had . But , in terms of that post -contractual conduct element, 
really that only comes into play in a substantive way when later in the relationship an employee says, 'Hey, I want 
to exercise my employee choice .' Then you sit down with the employer , and you have a look at how that 
relationship has developed over time  and what the practical reality of that relationship is. So I think that is where 
a bit of that confusion is coming in . It's really important to remember that the test  occurs at engagement  and for 
many employers , as you've acknowledged, employees  don't want to convert , so that will be the only time the test 
occur s and then post-contractual conduct com es in when the employee  exercise s their right  to employee choice . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Would an employer be prohibited from r ostering employees in a real and systemic 
manner without risking significant penalties for mi srepresenting what the pattern of work is going to be ? Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 61 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Still :  As I've mentioned, the pattern of work's actually  been removed from the core definition , but it still 
remains as a factor in those factors identified in paragraph (2)(c) . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Because my reading is   
Mr Still :  I'd make a number of observations about that. Firstly, 15A(2)(c)(iv), is where the pattern of work 
now is. I'd make a number  of observations. The only purpose those factors  serve is in assisting people to 
understand how they can assess whether there 's a firm advance commitment. At the end of the day , if there  is no 
firm advance commitment to continuing in indefinite work, then you are a casual. To take an example, which I 
think arise s in pre-Rossato -case law, if you have a relief worker  somebody fills in shifts for people  and they 
fill in for somebody who 's got COVID and then, being the nature of the pandemic, another person gets it  and 
another person gets  it, six months down the track they might have worked day in day out, exactly regular shifts , 
but at no point in any of that course of events have  they ever had any kind of promise of ongoing shifts because 
it's been well understood between the parties that they were only filling in as and when needed . You can have a 
totally regular pattern of work and not have a firm advance commitment and be genuinely casual.  
So the pattern of work is potentially relevant. Its relevance is  where  the pattern of work is of such a length and 
of such a regularity that you might start to be able to draw inferences about the actual understanding between the 
parties . But at the end of the day the question really is : did you have a firm advance commitment ? That isn't going 
to be answered by any  one of these factors in (2)(c)  individually , which is why I should note that paragraph (3)(b) , 
on its present drafting , does  say that not all of the factors need to be satisfied . It's u ltimately a factual question.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Multiple factors.  
Mr Manning :  Can I just add something to that , in the sense that  there is a definition of a 'regular casual 
employee ' in the Fair Work Act at the moment , whereby someone who is a regular casual employee has access to 
some rights that other casuals don't have  for example, in relation to the ability to request flexible work et cetera. 
That concept is unchanged by the bill. What that shows is that you can still be a casual and work on a regular 
basis , notwithstanding  that it can also be a factor that's relevant to the test of casualness.  I just raise that because 
I've seen some commentary that seems to suggest that, if there is any regularity, you can't be a casual. Not only is 
that incorrect, as Mr Still outlined, but I think you could infer that from the fact that there is still this notion of a 
regular casual employee in the act that 's unaffected by the proposed changes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Let's take the example of a medium -sized pub that employs 50 people. They have 
peaks and troughs throughout the year with regard to the seasonal  nature of where they operate. And, obviously, 
even during the week there are particular peak times. Let's say it's Thursday night, Friday night and Saturday. One 
scenario is that that job is every Thursday and Saturday throughout the year, and then maybe the other scenario is 
that it's just a summer job to get them through that period. Can that employer offer them that on a casual basis?  
Mr Hehir :  I might just start by saying I'm reluctant to engage in hypotheticals. But I think we can talk to the 
legislation and the existing legislation as well because both of them have, as part of them, the absence of a firm 
advance commitment. If there is a firm advance commitment, then they're not a casual under either definition. 
That's the law as it is now, and it'll be the law if this bill passes. But I'm really reluctant to engage in 
hypotheticals. We're really meant to avoid that here.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I understand you can't take hypothetical questions, but we're not talking about an 
imaginary business. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of businesses like that across Australia.  
Mr Still :  Perhaps I can point to some of the factors that might be relevant in those circumstances. You 
mentioned the example of a summer job. Seasonal labour is specifically contemplated in these provisions. If you 
look at clause 15A(4)(b), the legislation specifically contemplates that you might be engaged as a casual on a 
seasonal basis. There 's a very clear legislative intent that seasonal work could be casual.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So they're exempt?  
Mr Still :  No. It's still relative to the other factors, but it's clearly contemplated that those circumstances could 
be genuinely casual. I should say that's an exception to the prohibition of fixed -term contracting of casuals. But it 
does evidence that we expect that seasonal workers might well be genuinely casual.  
In relation to the example of somebody with strictly regular shifts, it really, I think, depends on the other 
understandings that exist around that person's employment. To touch on what Mr Hehir said, if the employment 
contract actually required them to work those shifts week in, week out on an ongoing basis, I think even under the 
existing test there would be quite a significant question about whether they were genuinely casual, because it 
would look a lot like a firm advance commitment to continuing and indefinite work according to an agreed pattern 
of work. It would really turn on factors like whether the ir arrangement allows th at employee to accept or reject 
shifts. If they have the capacity to say, 'Actually, this Thursday night I'm just not going to work; I'm off to the Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 62 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  football,' or whatever it is they want to do with their lives, that is a very relevant factor, and it exists in this test 
here. There are other factors that might also be relevant  for example, whether there is the availability of ongoing 
work in that workplace.  
What I would say is that that degree of a regular ity in a  pattern of work is one factor, and the regularity might 
help support an inference of firm advance commitment, but there are other matters that might be relevant. In 
particular, clear communications about whether ongoing work really is available and the ability to accept or reject 
shifts might well mean that that person is genuinely casual.  In a sense , there's probably not enough information in 
your example to really assess  it, in any event . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. If the  employer , in what you 're talking about there, has the right to reject or 
accept a shift , even though  the work is only every Thursday and Saturday, they would still be casual , and the 
employer can employ them under that basis.  
Mr Still :  It is certainly a powerful indication of casualness.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The problem is that employers need more than  just an indication ; they need to be 
able to understand whether or they are in  or out . 
Ms James :  The question of whether you can accept or reject a shift is a longstanding element that 's relevant to 
assessing whether someone is a casual or not.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. 
Ms James :  If we consider the long history of industrial relations in this country, for most of that history there 
has been no statutory definition of a casual , and these factors have been relevant. Whether you were or weren 't a 
casual was entirely determined by the common law, which contained these sorts of tests . So everyone is very 
familiar with them . They are well -established . The rejection or otherwise of a shift is one of the more central 
tenet s and  
Mr Hehir :  And is in the existing definition  that's in the act.  
Ms James :  That's right , so there is consistency there. But t here ha ve always been a range of things that are 
relevant to whether someone is a true casual or not , and I certainly recall at the Fair Work Ombudsman  that it was 
one of those things that there  was often confusion about from employees and employers : Where is the line ? What 
about the grey?  
What this legislation does is it places a clear definition in the legislation , and t hat definition is very much 
drawn on the longstanding principles  but with some adaption  and very much framed as a result of consultation. It 
also applies these key points where conversion is possible. So , rather than there being ongoing uncertainty , if that 
classification is right from the beginning, then there 's a clear process set out in the legislation for conversion 
should the employee choose it . 
You did reference before concerns about being exposed to penalties. I think it's the case that no -one i s exposed 
to penalties if the classification is right from the outset. In other words, if the contract as described for the casual 
reflects the intention at the time  and then if the relationship evolves, there 's no civil liability  and no penalties ; 
there's  just a point in time where the employee can exercise a choice. At that point , things might change . But I 
would suggest there 's actually more certainty in this framework for the parties rather than less certainty , and more 
certainty than under the common law that applied without much guidance for many decades  prior to any 
legislation being introduced at all  and prior to WorkPAC  and Skene . 
Mr Still :  By way of context I would say that the existing test in 15 A of the act is not a designation model . It 
doesn't say, 'You are a casual if your employer says that you're a casual .' What the existing definition  says is, 'Y ou 
must not have a firm advance commitment ' and provides a range of factors for assessing that  commitment . It 
actually  takes a very similar approach in looking to a range of factors in the relationship to assess the firm 
advance commitment. The principal difference really is  that, rather than being bound by the terms of the contract , 
this definition look s to the lived reality of the relationship as well.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What about in terms of the misrepresentation of the arrangement and there being a 
penalty for that employer if they 've misrepresented the relationship ? 
Mr Still :  Proposed section 359A provides  for, as you say , prohibition of misrepresentation of casual 
employment status. The key point o f that provision is that no penalty will apply to the employer if they reasonably 
believe d that  the person's stat us was as they had represented it to be. That test is very closely modelled on the 
existing sham contracting provisions in relation to employment as proposed to be amended by th is bill. Relevant 
factors in that 'reasonable belief ' defence include the size and nature of the enterprise, in particular. Large 
employers have sophisticated, large human resources support areas to help them get it right, in essence. But, for Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 63 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  smaller employers , in particular,  their lack of human resources support  and their limited resources are intended to 
be quite relevant in assessing what was reasonable for them to believe based on their knowledge of the system. Of 
course, there are other support mechanisms for small businesses that are intended to assist them to understand 
this. There is an Employer Advisory Service in the Fair Work Ombudsman, which is there  to provide advice to 
employers who aren't sure and need some advice to help them comply.  
Mr Hehir :  Basically the intent is consistent with other parts of the legislation , where anybody within the 
system  the broader clauses around misrepresentation apply broadly. This is a specific example, in a sense, that's 
being picked up. But the general principle within the Fair Work Act is that people should not deliberately or 
recklessly misrepresent what someone's rights are. That's an application of that broad principle to this place. 
Really what we're saying is: if you believe or suspect that  it's not a casual employment opportunity, don't tell the 
person it's a casual employment opportunity and hire them as such; tell them what it is. If you know it or you 
reasonably  suspect it , then you should really be upfront with your employee. Really, in my view,  it's a specific 
example of where a misrepresentation has been called out.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'll wrap my  question up here. I'm just keen to understand: what is the definition of 'a 
firm advance commitment'?  
Mr Still :  It isn't defined. It takes its ordinary meaning. It is, in essence, something you assess on the facts of 
each circumstance, but it's, I suppose, a clear understanding between the parties that there is a commitment to 
ongoing, indefinite employment. It  doesn't need to be contractual. That's clear. But it does need to be kind of a 
shared understanding,  on a solid basis of understanding, that there is in fact going to be ongoing work.  
Ms Godden :  It's worth also considering the legislative and legal history to that phrase. As I believe we've 
traversed in evidence, that phrase exists in the current section 15A of the Fair Work Act. It's also a very prominent 
feature of the case law on casual employees that the secretary referred to. There was a very long series of 
jurisprudence on that which definitely informs the formulation of the phrase. There has been significant 
consideration of what that phrase means. That has been included in this bill, so it's not like we're starting from 
scratch. It is a phrase that has been considered previously. It exists in the legislation now, albeit in a section that is 
phrased in a different manner. So we're not starting at ground zero with that one.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What would need to happen with the existing casuals  within a workplace ? Do they 
all need to be reassessed against the new definition?  
Mr Still :  No. The transitional and application provisions provide that casuals who were genuinely casual prior 
to commencement of the provisions will remain in that status. They will, post commencement, have capacity to 
access the conversion pathways, but unless they choose   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I know it's not retrospective, but is that backdated in that sense? If they have been 
working with the employer for more than 12 months, for a small business   
Ms Williams :  It's part 18 of the bill that goes to those transitional and application provisions . Essentially, as 
Mr Still said, if someone is classified a casual now , they'll be classified as a casual under the new legislation . We 
talked before about those qualifying periods to access the employee choice definition pathway, so , on 
commencement , the qualifying period starts at zero for all casual employees. So what that effectively means is  
that the bill , as proposed , has a commencement date for casuals for 1 July next year. For employees in medium to 
large businesses, the first time they 'll be able to qualify and access the employee choice is from 1 January 2025 . 
Then, for employees in small businesses, that will be from 1 July 2025.  
Mr Hehir :  It's important to note that the existing offer provisions will continue to operate. So the 12 -month 
period where the employer currently has to make a proactive offer   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's n ot backdated to when they were actually employed.  
Mr Hehir :  No, t hey start at zero   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's w hen the bill takes effect.  
Mr Hehir :  but there is existing conversion. Then the employer is responsible for making an offer where it's 
appropriate. That will run on its existing time  frame.  
Ms Williams :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   I have a block of questions , and then we're almost ready to move on. I want to go to one other 
part of the bill in relation to the changes to the delegates ' rights and the right of entry. The department issued a 
series of consultation papers on 6 April 2023 to support the development of the omnibus bill. Could you take me 
to where the expansion of the right of entry powers and the expansion of delegates' rights are in the consultation 
paper . Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 64 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Cains :  Those two measures weren't actually part of the consultation paper that was released by the 
department.  
Senator CASH:   Why weren't they included in the consultation paper?  
Mr Cains :  I think the answer is that the issues raised in relation to delegates' rights   
Mr Still :  I would say that they weren't raised in terms in the discussion paper, but the discussion paper did ask 
a question about what other improvements could be made to the general protections to clarify protections for 
persons engaging or not engaging in industrial activity. That's page 11   
Senator CASH:   So it was a catch -all. 
Mr Still :  So it's something that emerged from consultation on that paper.  
Mr Cains :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   We'll explore that further at the committee hearing , because I know that we 're unfortunately 
short of time today. When was the department first made aware that these measures would be included as 
measures in the bill?  
Mr Hehir :  I would need to check that. As the officers have advised, we received information back about 
parties to the consultation, suggesting that there could be improvements here. I would need to check the date in 
terms of when a decision was made, noting , of course , that I'll need to take into account the standard c abinet and 
other processes.  
Senator CASH:   Who provided that feedback?  
Mr Hehir :  I'll need to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   On which date did the government make a final policy decision to include these proposals in 
the bill?  
Mr Hehir :  I think you're asking the same question maybe but with slightly different phrasing.  
Senator CASH:   Well, I said, 'When was the department first made aware ?' versus 'final policy decision'.  
Mr Hehir :  I did say that I would need to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Both of them on notice  Sorry. Prior to the final decision being made, was the department 
involved in any discussions regarding the inclusion of the measures in the legislation?  
Mr Hehir :  We provide advice on all aspects of the legislation , so  
Senator CASH:   So that's a yes?  
Mr Hehir :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   The explanatory material  and we've obviously been going through it  includes no  costing 
of the measures set out in part 7 of schedule 1, which enshrine s a new right to be a workplace  delegate, including 
reasonable access to paid part -time leave during normal working hours for training.  How many businesses could 
the new workplace  delegate 's right impact?  
Mr Cains :  The provisions will operate broadly.  
Senator CASH:   How many?  
Mr Cains :  I don't have that number in front of me. I guess employers who are covered by the provisions of the 
Fair Work Act   
Senator CASH:   How many employers? Who is covered by the provisions?  
Mr Still :  I think these provisions will apply to national system employers in particular. As Mr Cains said, I 
think we'd need to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   So basically all businesses, other than if there's a specific exclusion for, say, a small business 
in relation to some aspects of it. If you're a national system employer you're not carved out of this provision?  
Mr Still :  I don't believe so.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you. In terms of the regulatory impact statement , businesses are raising in particular 
the cost to them of providing reasonable access to paid time during normal working hours for training. Can I 
confirm: it 's the business that actually has to bear that cost?  
Ms Godden :  Are you asking about the cost of the time o r the cost of the training?  
Senator CASH:   That's a very good question. Let's do both instead.  
Ms James :  I think the provision  says reasonable access to paid time.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 65 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   So it is paid time. Take me through what that means.  
Mr Still :  The provision about reasonable access to paid time, firstly, doesn't apply to small -business 
employers at all.  
Senator CASH:   No, that's why I asked if there was a qualification, for that reason.  
Mr Still :  Indeed. In terms of what amount of paid time might be required in any particular business, there are 
two ways that will be determined. Firstly, in general , it will be a question of what 's reasonable. That might turn on 
how big the business is, how many delegates there are , how many of them are seeking leave for training and so 
forth. In most instances , the intention of these provisions is that the detail of exactly what is reasonable in terms of 
paid-time training will be s et through that modern awards system , through an enterprise agreement or through, in 
some circumstances, a workplace determination.  
The intention is that the provisions set a high -level framework right to reasonable paid time , which will very 
much depend on the circumstances of the business. But in most circumstances the Fair Work Commission will 
make , and is indeed required to, a delegate 's rights term in modern awards. The intention there is that that will set 
out detail. Employers can make an enterprise agreement which could include a delegate 's rights term which would 
set out more specifically for their workplace. If an employer complies with a delegate 's rights term in a modern 
award or in an enterprise agreement , they are deemed to comply with all of the facilities and requirements in th ose 
provisions. At th at point , you don't need to worry about reasonableness ; you simply need to comply with 
whatever the applicable modern award , workplace determination or enterprise agreement term is . The intention is 
that that can help clarify specifically what is required in particular industries, workplaces or occupations.  
Senator CASH:   I'm even more confused now  it's a little bit like the casuals  than I was before. A number 
of businesses  are raising this at the hearings and certainly in conversations that we are having. They believe that it 
is going to be an expense for them and that that expense has not been looked at in the regulatory impact statement. 
The question is: if a delegate is entitled to reasonable access to paid time during  normal  working hours for 
training , does the business literally foot that cost , in that the person would otherwise be working and they've now 
gone off to do the training?  
Mr Hehir :  If I might step it back a little bit: as Mr Still said, these are high -level provisions in the bill, and at 
some point potentially within the act. There is a reasonableness provision that is clearly outlined in the bill. The 
aspects that make it difficult to try and cost are that in looking at this we didn't believe it was possible to have one 
size fit s all that, in actual fact, the best people to be able to figure out what was reasonable were the parties. The 
mechanism that we use in Australia for agreements or for the parties to be able to have their say and put their case 
forward is variations to modern awards and/or enterprise agreements. Rather than trying to craft a blanket 
provision, what we're looking for is for the Fair Work Commission to work with the parties. We absolutely 
anticipate that the parties will do their jobs to their best ability and that we will have employers and employees 
represented well. Then the commission will come up with what the appropriate clause is. We believe that is likely 
to vary from industry to industry.  
Senator CASH:   And different sides of business.  
Mr Hehir :  And business and a whole range of things. As Mr Still said, small business is excluded, so that's 
there. The clause  that might go into an award can be improved on. If parties want to go and negotiate as part of an 
enterprise agreement and make variation to that, they can. My recollection is that they can't go worse than the 
award. If they want to vary it to actually meet the needs of their specific business and the ir specific workforce , 
they can choose to do so. Again, we're not able to cost that. It's not costed really , on the basis that it 's subject to 
different processes which will actually determine the extent of it.  
Senator CASH:   Who ultimately bears the cost? It may well be the employer.  
Mr Hehir :  Where it's reasonable, it's anticipated the employer will.  
Senator CASH:   And that's regardless of size, subject to the small -business exemption?  
Ms Godden :  As we've set out, we 're expecting that the vast majority of these clauses will be contained in the 
industrial instrument. However, if there isn't such a Fair Work instrument that applies , subsection (5) of the newly 
proposed 350C provides : 
  in determining what is reasonable for the purposes of subsection (3)   
which is the workplace delegate's right   
regard must be had to the following:  
(a) the size and nature of the enterprise;  
(b) the resources of the employer of the workplace delegate;  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 66 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  (c) the facilities available at the enterprise.  
There is that statutory recognition of what must be considered in determining what is reasonable.  
Senator CASH:   I still get back to that an employer can ultimately be the one bearing the cost.  
Mr Hehir :  Where it's reasonable.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. In the hearing in Perth we had a discussion with some of the witnesses about the 
possible number of workplace delegates per business. Has the department done any estimation in terms of the 
assumptions made about the number of potential delegates per business?  
Mr Hehir :  No, I don't believe we had a look at the number of delegates per business, because that will be a 
function of individual union rules and approaches in terms of how they actually determine delegates.  
Senator CASH:   Is there a cap on the number of delegates that a business could have?  
Mr Hehir :  'What 's reasonable ' is the way that we believe that will be looked at. If there 's a high proportion of 
delegates , then it might well be reasonable that one or two go and bring back the information and share it. We 
haven't put a cap in there. What we 've used is the reasonableness test : what's reasonable in the circumstances.  
Senator CASH:   Who determines reasonableness?  
Mr Still :  In the first instance, that's a matter that would be determined in the workplace. If there is a dispute 
about it, it will go through the ordinary   
Senator CASH:   Through the Fair Work Commission?  
Mr Still :  The Fair Work Commission for conciliation but not arbitration , unless there is consent to arbitration. 
If the re weren't consent to arbitration, ultimately recourse would have to be made to a court to enforce.  
Senator CASH:   Okay. Understood.  I have a number of other questions , but I know we will have another 
opportunity to ask more fulsome questions in terms of actually exploring particular clauses of the bill. I do thank 
the chair for his indulgence today. You have been very indulgent, so thank you.  
CHAIR:   Senator Brockman.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms James, do we have the right people at the table for appointments to the National 
Construction Industry Forum?  
Ms James :  They're approaching  they're never far!  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Excellent!  Just at the high level , what advice did you give, or what consultations 
were made with you from the minister , on appointments to the National Construction Industry Forum?  
Ms Godden :  The department undertakes the following due diligence checks for all nominees for appointments 
to statutory positions in the workplace relations portfolio. The following checks were completed for all NCIF 
nominees ahead of their appointment by the minister. These are: media checks including Google News checks; 
bankruptcy checks; name and date -of-birth searches of the Australian Financial Security Authority Bankruptcy 
Register; company directorships checks; personal name searches of the Australian Securities and Investment 
Commission database; banned and disqualified checks   
Senator BROCKMAN:   Sorry, what was that one?  
Ms Godden :  A banned and disqualified check, which is a search of ASIC's banned and disqualified register. 
Then there's a lobbyist register check, which is a lobbyist search of the Attorney -General's Department's lobbyist 
register. We google the nominee's name and check the first five pages of results for anything adverse in relation to 
the nominee. And we check AustLII to ensure that the nominee's declarations in relation to being a respondent in 
any criminal or civil matters are correct.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Do appointments then go to cabinet?  
Ms Godden :  That depends on the exact appointment that we're talking about. We do have a number of 
different appointments in the workplace relations portfolio   
Senator BROCKMAN:   I'm talking about the National Construction Industry Forum.  
Ms Godden :  I don't believe that appointments to the National Construction Industry Forum are cabinet 
appointments.  
Mr Hehir :  The normal appointment process in this case and I'll take this on notice to take advice on this  is 
that there's an option. It can be agreed by the PM or it can be agreed by cabinet. I just need to check how it was 
done. That's quite a standard thing for   Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 67 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BROCKMAN:   Yes, absolutely. Could you just get me that on notice  if they were agreed by the 
PM directly or if they were agreed by cabinet?  
Mr Hehir :  Yes. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   You have a due diligence procedure which comes after a name is presented to you. 
Did you do any work in presenting names to the minister for inclusion?  
Ms J Anderson :  No. 
Mr Hehir :  I don't recall, but I'll check that. It isn't my recollection that we did, but I'll check.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Okay, you can take that one on notice also. And you undertook the due diligence on 
everyone who was appointed?  
Ms Godden :  Yes. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Did you find anything during that due diligence process that you reported to the 
minister?  
Ms Godden :  We don't usually go into the details of the advice provided to the minister as a result of those due 
diligence checks. There are obviously some personal privacy concerns about that.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I'm not asking for personal privacy details; I'm asking if there was anything in the 
due diligence. It was your due diligence report to the minister . Was every box ticked or w ere things flagged in the 
due diligence report?  
Ms Godden :  Perhaps there has been a slight misunderstanding about what our due diligence report does. Our 
due diligence report reports the findings o n all of those checks.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Yes. 
Ms Godden :  So it will always contain something, as in it will report the findings of that. It might, for 
example, report that someone doesn't appear on the lobbyist register or they don't appear on the banned and 
disqualified register. There will always be something.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   But, surely , in a due diligence report, certain things raise red flags  to use the 
colloquial  whereas a 'nothing here, nothing here, nothing here ' doesn't raise any red flags . 
Ms Godden :  Again, we report on the outcome.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So y ou report on the outcome. Were there  any other additional names put forward 
that were not finally appointed ?  By the sound of it , no you just did the due diligence.   
Ms Godden :  Could I take that one on notice , please?  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Okay . Did the due diligence report into Zac h Smith  to the National Construction 
Industry Forum include the fact  that he was under investigation by the ACT Integrity Commission?  
Ms Godden :  I would have to take that one on notice .  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Were you aware , and is it part of the due diligence report  on Mr Smith , that he was 
facing numerous Fair Work Act breaches in the Federal Court during the appointment process?  
Ms Godden :  I would have to take that one on notice  to properly answer you . 
Mr Hehir :  As Ms Godden outlined earlier , we do n't tend to disclose the findings of our advice except to the 
minister as part of a process, including potentially a cabinet process. I just need to check and see what the 
appropriate level of information that I can provide is based on that. You're asking a whole series of questions 
which then require us to , effectively , disclose  what has been in the advice .  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Alright . But, on the face of it , the due diligence report  that you have said to me  that 
you provide to the minister  would have reported , for example, that Mr Smith had been previously found to have 
breached the Fair Work Act prior to the appointment .  
Mr Hehir :  It's entirely possible that our checks will find issues that people have gone through . Given my 
answer before, I 'm reluctant to continue answering questions around the detail of this.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I accept that. I 'm happy for you to take it on notice. Could you also take on notice 
whether this committee could have a copy in confidence, perhaps? Can you do that during an estimates hearing?  
Ms James :  We can't in estimates, I'm afraid.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Alright. Could we have a copy of the due diligence report on Mr Smith . Minister, 
would it be appropriate for someone who has been found to have breached the Fair Work Act to provide advice 
on how to improv e building and construction industry culture?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 68 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   I heard the officials take you through the tests that were undertaken , and I have n't heard 
anything yet that suggests Mr Smith did n't pass those tests.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   That's not really the question I asked you, though . Would it be appropriate for 
someone who has been found to have breached the Fair Work Act to provide advice on how to improve the 
building and construction industry culture?  
Senator Watt:   You asked me if it would be appropriate , and  I would imagine that , in setting out those tests  
and those checks that were done by the department to determine  whether someone should be appointed, they 
would set what's appropriate. There was a bankruptcy check ; there was a company directorship  check ; there was 
checking to see if someone was banned or disqualified , particularly  as a directo r, and w hether they had criminal 
convictions.  It would appear that they were the test s of who is an appropriate person . And, again , I have n't heard 
you suggest that Mr Smith , or any of the other appointees , didn't passed those tests.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   There was also an AustLII check in the re. I'm sure you 'll know what AustLII  is. 
Senator Watt:   Yes, I do.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   If an AustLII c heck had been done , you would find a Federal Court judge describing 
Mr Smith's behaviour as  acting in an improper manner  as a holder of an entry permit , by swearing and acting  
aggressively towards a site manager , and it  goes on to say that it  'has no place on a building site'. Is this the sort of 
behaviour that someone who sits on the board to improve culture in the building industry should display ? 
Senator Watt:   All I can say again is that a number of tests were done  which were set to determine the 
appropriateness of the appointees . I don't know the backgrounds , particularly, of a range of the other appointees 
and whether there 's anything in any of their AustLII  checks that might apply to them as well.  Clearly , the decision 
was that Mr Smit h and each of the other appointees were appropriate people to sit here. He is, after all , the head 
of one of the major construction unions , if not the major construction union , in the country , representing workers 
in that sector. I would think those workers might have something to say about safety and other matters on 
construction worksites.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I don't think that 's a question, Minister. You've brought up the organisation : this is an 
organisation that has been described as a serial offender, engaging in whatever action  and making  whatever threat 
it wishes without regard to the law . Again, is this a person who should be appointed to a body that is looking at 
the culture of the building industry?  
Senator Watt:   I refer  you to my previous answers . I've already answered your question a couple of times.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Secretary , do you agree with Mr Smith's statement that the Fair Work Ombudsman 
prioritises the antiworker ideological fight?  
Ms James :  Without context, I'm not going to  cast judgement on a statement that I don't have in front of me. It 
doesn't sound like the sort of thing I would agree with , but I would say that the purpose of the forum and those 
who are on it  is to bring experience  representing people in the construction industry, and  he fulfils that 
requirement . Having  attended the first of the meetings , I would say that he played a very constructive role , as did 
all of the other members . It was a very constructive meeting , and  there was a lot of goodwill in the room. Based 
on my observations , I don't have any concerns.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Were you aware of the ACT Integrity Commission investigation?  
Ms James :  Not specifically . 
Senator BROCKMAN:   So y ou're unaware  if the minister's office was aware of the ACT Integrity 
Commission   
Ms James :  I think we 've taken that on notice . 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Alright , I'll leave  it there.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you very much for that last line of questioning with workplace relations  for 
those that might be following along. I want to ask some questions about the review of the Fair Work Ombudsman  
that's been commissioned . Firstly,  I understand that KPMG has been appointed . Is that correct?  
Mr Hehir :  Yes, that 's correct . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What was the process involved in selecting KPMG , and who was the decision -
maker?  I'm also  interested in understanding if the minister was involved  in that decision.  
Ms Yanchenko :  The minister was involved to the extent that a list of possible applicants the department 
selected was provided to him to consider. The department made the decision to shortlist those applicants , or Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 69 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  potential applicants . Then  there was a limited tender process that went out to only those particular organisations. 
The ultimate decision -maker  I will just double -check , but I'm pretty sure it was the relevant deputy secretary.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So it was a delegate within the department ? 
Ms Yanchenko :  Yes, although i t was not Mr H ehir at the time . It was somebody acting in his position.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's fine. Who drafted the terms of reference for the review?  
Ms Yanchenko :  That was the department , in consultation with the office and with the Fair Work 
Ombudsman.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   With the office?  
Ms Yanchenko :  The minister's office.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you for clarifying. Who signed off on the terms of reference ? 
Ms Yanchenko :  I will take that on notice . I'm not quite sure. I was n't personally involved in a lot of the work ; 
I was conflicte d out.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you aware of whether the minister was involved in the sign -off, or do you think 
it would it have been  with the delegate ? 
Ms Yanchenko :  I will have to take that on notice . As I said,  I was n't personally involved.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's fine. Do you know whether any stakeholders outside of the government or the 
Fair Work Ombudsman have any input into the terms of reference?  
Ms Yanchenko :  Not into the terms of reference, no.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Did I hear you say that the ombudsman's office had involvement in the terms of 
reference?  
Ms Yanchenko :  Yes. It was the department in consultation with the ombudsman and the minister's office . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Secretary, you are a former Fair Work Ombudsman. Do you believe that you 
discharged your role adequately? I'm sure you'd say you did.  
Ms James :  As far as I recall, and as far as I could.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you aware of comments that have been made, particularly by the CFMEU  we 
were talking about Mr Zach Smith before; I think he's the national secretary  calling for the abolition of the Fair 
Work Ombudsman, saying that the Fair Work Ombudsman has proven itself unable to deal with many issues 
affecting workers, like wage theft, sham contracting and corporate insolvencies? Going back to your time as 
ombudsman, do you believe that you were ever unable to deal with the many issues affecting workers, like wage 
theft, sham contracting and corporate insolvencies?  
Ms James :  I fell it's a bit strange giving evidence based on two jobs ago. But what I will say   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But it gives you a particular insight into the role, obviously.  
Ms James :  Yes. I'm not sure what the rules are here. I'm happy to talk at a higher level. I observe, in response 
to the comments that people might have made about the Fair Work Ombudsman, that , when you are a regulator , 
people who are part of  what the FWO would call the regulated community often have an opinion about you, 
particularly when you're not behaving in a way they would like you to. As a regulator you need to be neutral and 
straddle a lot of interests. I would say now, as I said then, that every regulator would say that they could do with 
more resources. In the case of the Fair Work Ombudsman, their regulated community  is very extensive. It's every 
employer and every employee in the country. I suspect that when I was the Fair Work Ombudsman  I'm sure I 
recall  I asked then minister Senator Cash for extra resources or changes to the framework from time to time   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   As is your right.  
Ms James :  That's what you do as a regulator. But I think the Fair Work Ombudsman has, through all its 
iterations and through its different leaders, done an excellent job dealing with a very evolving landscape when it 
comes to workplace compliance, and education of employees and employers about workplace laws.  
CHAIR:   I would just note  and Ms James was kind enough to answer it  that we are asking for opinions 
with this question. So, we just need to mindful when it comes to the follow -up question. Whether Ms James wants 
to answer it is up to her, but   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you for reminding me of the standing orders. Ms James has pretty much 
answered my question. Do you see that there are gaps within the powers of the ombudsman that could be 
addressed to enable them to fulfil their role?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 70 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James :  It's not really my role to give opinions on that, sitting in this chair, anymore. Two jobs ago I might 
have given you an opinion on that. But in this role, that is entirely a matter for government.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. Thanks, Chair.  
CHAIR:   We'll go on our break now, and then we'll come back with outcome 1. Thank you everybody from 
outcome 3.  
Proceedings suspended from 16:18 to 16:36  
CHAIR:   We are at outcome 1, Employment, and  we go to Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   I turn to the line of questioning in relation to the employment white paper that's just recently 
been released. I know we've pursued a line of questioning before  about  the department's role et cetera , and we 
now have the release of the employment white paper. When was the department made aware that the employment  
white pap er would be released?  
Ms James :  We were in constant communication with Treasury , as we were working with them to finalise the 
white paper and in the lead -up to the release. I think the actual timing wasn't clear for a little while, but we knew 
that it was imminent, and we'd had input into content of relevance to us. I'll just check with others at the table to 
see if they recall precisely when we were advised . 
Ms Huender:   As the secretary said, we were constantly engaged. My first recollection is at an IDC, probably 
towards the  end of  August, but we would need to take the actual  time  
Senator CASH:   Towards the end of August  okay.  The department  then was consulted about the actual 
release date  as well ?  
Ms Huender:   Yes.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the constant engagement , was it one or two of the department 's staff members 
who were seconded over to Treasury?  
Ms Huender:   We had one staff member   
Senator CASH:   It was the one staff member, which we'd previously discussed at estimates. When you say 
'constant communication', what does that mean?  
Ms James :  I guess the way I would describe it, from where I sat, is that we set up an internal group of people 
who were involved in various elements of the white paper. Of course, people from our skills area, people from our 
employment area and people from our workplace relations area were involved. In any given week, someone from 
one of those areas was talking to someone in Treasury about the draft material. Of course, there were the formal 
interdepartmental committee meetings as well. As I'm sure you 're familiar  with, as you get closer to the 
finalisation of these documents, the discussions intensify  and the regularity of the engagement intensifies . That all 
happened as I expected. So I would just describe the engagement as very regular. I couldn't tell you , and we 
would n't record , every single conversation our people were having , but there were a lot of them.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine. If I need any further information on that, I'm happy to put something on notice.  
On the release of the employment white paper, you were in constant communication with Treasury and you 
believe there was potentially some consultation back in August on the release date of the employment white 
paper. Why, then, wasn't the minister at the press conference?  
Senator Watt:   I believe he was on leave that week.  
Senator CASH:   He was on leave, was he? Everybody is entitled to leave. I have absolutely no issues with that 
at all. It is the employment white paper, though. Was there not another time it could have been released so that the 
minister for employment could have actually stood there themselves?  
Senator Watt:   I don't think any minister expects that the entire operation of government operate s around their 
diary. I certainly don't. Other ministers have made announcements that relate to my portfolio, and that's fine by 
me. Life goes on. Work goes on.  
Senator CASH:   This was the employment white paper. It is obviously a significant piece of work.  
Senator Watt:   Sure.  
Senator CASH:   The employment white paper states  the government 's objective  is 'sustained and inclusive full 
employment '. It further states employment services  I'm assuming that means the employment services that this 
department administers  is one of the 'key enablers ' to achieve this objective. What was the department's role in 
contributing to that finding, and what programs et cetera do you actually expect would be, say, added or modified 
as a result?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 71 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Lauman:   There are two principal deliverables from the employment services areas. One is the eight 
principles that will guide employment services reforms. They were published in the white paper and will guide 
the forward thinking not only about employment services in this space but in disability services and remote 
services as well. The other key deliverable out of the employment area was for change agenda for the local jobs 
program in advance of further review of that program when the current funding ceases in 2025. That looks at our 
microregions in WA in particular and bringing some APS to those areas to better understand those microregions 
and also to look at the program and the governance arrangements that have been set up to connect it with 
communities. It's to look at them in a very practical sense but also in a forward sense, asking, 'How do we equip 
communities to build the capability to engage well with the labour market?'  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of changes to the local jobs program  as you said, there are two pillars, and that 
is one of them  do you have an outline of time frames et cetera for when the changes will be made?  
Ms Lauman:   I will turn to Ms Wisowaty for the specific detail, but certainly in terms of the employment 
facilitators themselves arrangements have begun to recruit those officers and conversations have been had with 
the providers who are currently in those microregions to begin transitioning.  
Ms Wisowaty :  We are looking to do some consultation before the end of the year on the future of the 
program, noting, as Ms Lauman said, it does end on 30 June 2025. We are also currently undertaking a look at the 
representation of the task forces and how we can better support them in terms of educational supports, which we 
will look to do the first half of next year.  
Senator CASH:   What's the nature of the consultation? Who are you going to be consulting with or who are 
you consulting with?  
Ms Wisowaty :  We are linking with the Nexus Centre , which is  run by the Department of Social Services. 
They are looking at lots of place based activities . We are linking with  them . We will also do some targeted 
consultations with community organisations, people that have run place  based type activities throughout Australia 
and others. We are finalising the invitees for that at the moment.  
Senator CASH:   When do you expect the consultation to start?  
Ms Wisowaty :  In November.  
Senator CASH:   Just exploring the employment white paper further, Secretary, it indicates that the 
government will be backing social enterprises to address labour market disadvantage. Could you elaborate on 
that?  
Ms James :  I think those measures sit more squarely within the Social Services portfolio than they do in ours.  
Ms Huender:   Social Services and Treasury.  
Ms James :  We've been involved in discussions around them, and there's a lot of connectivity between a lot of 
the place based work that Social Services and Treasury are leading and what we are doing. We're not responsible 
for it.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the social enterprises that would be involved, do you know what they would be?  
Ms James :  I am not in a position to talk to them, but others who have been involved in conversations might be 
able to venture into that territory a little.  
Ms Huender:   It's being led by the entrenched disadvantage taskforce in Treasury. We are certainly having 
discussions around what a social enterprise is and how you would define it.  
Senator CASH:   I was asking for specific examples, and now I understand  that's still to be determined , what a 
social enterprise would be . Understood. I was going to ask , then, how do those changes interact with the 
discussions that have been had in relation to the Workforce Australia employment services inquiry ? 
Ms Huender:   We're still waiting for the report  from the inquiry . 
Senator CASH:   The end of November . 
Ms Huender:   Towards the end of November, yes. That will feed into our discussions with Treasury and DSS 
around social enterprises.  
Senator CASH:   The employment white paper , as well, recognises that mutual obligations can drive 
participation  and that it's important to have well  designed mutual obligation requirements to better support job 
seekers. What changes are looking at being made ? How will the system itself be modified to better support 
participants across the employment programs ? Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 72 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms James :  As Ms Huender,  mentioned, we still awaiting the p arliamentary inquiry into Workforce Australia , 
which we expect to present to government a range of issues for it to consider . I would be surprised if the mutual 
obligation framework wasn't part of that.  
Senator CASH:   So the employment white paper sets out the principles et cetera , but then from the perspective 
of the actual  on-the-ground changes , because you do have that inquiry we are waiting for the inquiry.  
Ms James :  They 've been looking very closely at how this plays out   
Senator CASH:   With the whole context of   
Ms James :  Obviously we have been monitoring that as well , noting that the Workforce Australia program is 
only in its second year.  
Senator CASH:   On compliance, can you confirm the number of payments suspensions and cancellations that 
have been applied since the implementation of Workforce Australia in July 2022?  
Ms M Ryan :  Dr O'Rance and I will play a bit of tag team here. Since Workforce Australia commenced in July 
last year, to 30 September 2023 there have been, which includes Workforce Australia online participants, 
Workforce Australia services participants and transition to work , there is a total of one 1,838,410 payment 
suspensions.  In terms of applied demerits   
Ms James :  While they are doing calculations at the table , we' re aware that there has been some press about 
the number of suspensions. There are some concerns about the number of suspensions , and we're prepared to talk 
more about that. One thing I will say is that a suspension as notified does not necessarily mean a person's payment 
was in actual fact suspended. That depends on how quickly the issue was rectified . By and large, two -thirds of 
suspensions are rectified within five  business  days. I don't say that to be dismissive of the impact of suspensions , 
irrespective of whether it impacts on your payment . I understand that in the current environment , with cost -of-
living pressures, for people on income support , who are on the lowest of income, it would be very distressing and 
alarming to have your payment suspended or to receive notice of your payment being suspended . But as we work 
through  actual  impacts, there are a number of variables . I apologise again  for talking about a complex framework , 
but it is something we  need to bear in mind.  
Dr O'Rance :  Overall, 1.1 million demerits. I can give you the full integer  if you like.  
Senator CASH:   If you wouldn't mind.  
Dr O'Rance :  1,102,125.  We have that broken down  into online and provider services as well .  
Senator CASH:   I would be interested in that.  
Dr O'Rance :  For demerits in Workforce Australia online from July 2022 to 30 September 202 3 there were  
153,145 demerits , for online . For Workforce Australia  services , 948,980. And none for transition to work. But it 
doesn't apply.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you for that. In terms of the employment white paper  again, the minister obviously did 
put out a release.  It did say that the government's vision is underpinned by five ambitious objectives , including a 
new,  bolder full employment objective. Minister, what is the meaning of that , in particular , in terms of the 
definition of full employment?  
Senator Watt:   I do recall this being addressed by the minister at the time , but I might need some help from 
the officials in terms of what he actually said. I also remember the Treasurer  talking about this, that there  were 
differences between NAIRU and full employment . I just want to get it right.  
Senator CASH:   That's why I want to pursue it.  
Ms James :  The white paper  describes the government's objective as sustained and inclusive full employment, 
which  is where everyone who wants a job should be able to find one without having to search for too long.  
Senator CASH:   So that 's what 's in there. If I look at  what the Reserve Bank Governor said  it was Michele 
Bullock in her speech on 20 June 2023  the comment made there was that there  is a level of unemployment that 
is sustainable with keeping inflation under control. Do you agree with that?  
Ms James :  As someone who is not an economist and not the Treasury Secretary, the Reserve Bank Governor's 
assessment about the settings in the economy around inflation and the relationship between that and 
unemployment  is not something that I would comment on . I think the white paper did traverse this subject matter. 
This is very much in the realm of the Treasury's policy area. I think that what the white paper did is set out an 
objective for the government based on aspirations for full employment that go to not just a number and not just a 
national number, but looking at the distribution of opportunity and equality across the country, recognising that 
while we have the lowest unemployment rates that we have had in decades, there are pockets of geographical Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 73 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  disadvantage and there are individuals who are not benefiting from that macroeconomic environment.  I think that 
the white paper goes more to that when it 's talking about the government's aspirations for full employment and 
not the economic formulation and modelling that goes to what the Reserve Bank is talking about.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. You said that you had constant communication with Treasury throughout the 
formulation of the white paper. In terms of the discussions , what do you believe the level of unemployment 
should be?  
Ms James :  That's not something I have a view on.  
Senator CASH:   Even though  it's the department of employment ? 
Ms James :  I think we traversed this subject matter last time. We would say  what we said then : it is the 
Treasury's purview to deal with the macroeconomic settings for the economy and questions about whether there is 
a particular rate. What the government has said in the white paper  and that's a Treasury penned document, with 
a lot of input across government , of course  is that it's framing its aspirations for full employment differently 
from being a number . I wouldn't venture any particular number. I would say that , from the employment services 
system's point of view, when it comes to ensuring that our system is working in a way that helps people who are 
unemployed find a job without having to search too long , we don't  quite have  those settings in place yet. We do 
have people in our caseload who have been unemployed for a very long time. That 's an increasing proportion of 
the caseload. That is something where , when we look at our employment services system, we do need to ask the 
question : Is that operating in a way that will help achieve this aspiration? Is it doing all it can? That 's something 
that I've talked to providers about . I've done a couple of speeches to providers in the last little while , including 
one post  the release of the white paper , where we talked about this.  
Senator CASH:   Are the speeches to providers publicly available and can we get a copy?  
Ms James :  There is one speech online that I gave to the Workforce Australia provide r conference that we 
convened. I spoke at NESA 's conference a couple of weeks ago   
Senator CASH:   Have you uploaded th at?  
Ms James :  I don't know that I've uploaded the transcript, but I have, on LinkedIn, released some of the slides 
that I talked to.  
Senator CASH:   Is it possible to get a copy of the transcript?  
Ms James :  I'll take that on notice. I was adjusting that , right to the last minute , and I did have notes but I 
suspect what came out of my mouth   
Senator CASH:   Reflected the slides.  
Ms James :  A version of the slides  has been released on line, on  LinkedIn , but I can give you the full set of 
slides.  
Senator CASH:   That would be greatly appreciated.  
Ms Huender:   The slides were circulated to conference members.  
Ms James :  That's right, th e slides were circulated to conference members. In fact, I have a copy of one of 
them here because I thought we might go into some of this territory,  and it 's an excellent reference.  
Senator CASH:   I think I have to hand over the call , but I will come back and pursue  that. 
Senator RICE:   Hello. I want to start with your response to a question on notice that I asked in February 
estimates , which was number SQ23 -000208 , regarding the Targeted C ompliance Framework and particular 
cohorts . Your response to that question  was that, between July and December last year, 57.8 per cent of the 
Workforce Australia services cohort had their payments suspended , which is pretty extraordinary , while only 23.8 
per cent of the online cohort had their payments suspended. First up, could I get an update on those figures  the 
latest available data?  
Ms Lauman:   Before the team starts, we have the response from your letter to table . There are two questions 
that we'll need to take on notice  we require some additional time on those  and there are two that need to be 
referred to Services Australia , but we 've indicated that in the response for you.  
Senator RICE:   Terrific. Did I ask that question in   
Ms Lauman:   It may be a similar question, but we will respond.  
Dr O'Rance :  To confirm, Senator, are you after the updated percentage of all participants, for online and for 
services?  
Senator RICE:   No. The updated percentages of people who've had their payments suspended.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 74 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Dr O'Rance :  The number of individuals and t he percentage ? 
Senator RICE:   Yes. 
Dr O'Rance :  The percentages of everybody who had commenced and had mutual obligations at any time 
from July 2022  to 30 September 2023 , for Work force Australia Online  it's 39.5 per cent  and for Workforce 
Australia services it's 70 .4 per cent. That's for suspensions. Would you  like the number of participants as well?  
Senator RICE:   Yes, please.  
Dr O'Rance :  For Work force  Australia Online that 39.5 per cent  relates to 111,900 people. F or Workforce 
Australia services , the 70.4 per cent  relates to 4 08,895 people.  
Senator RICE:   You've still got considerably more Work force Australia participants through face-to-face 
services than you have online.  
Dr O'Rance :  Yes. 
Senator RICE:   Do you find the 70 per cent figure as surprising as me with regard to Work force Australia 
participants who had their payments sus pended in that period?  
Ms M Ryan :  It is a high figure and we acknowledge that and the Secretary also acknowledge d that it 's a high 
figure. In the department, we have been proactively working with those providers , particularly since April this 
year, to better understand the reasons and to educate providers on the application of the targeted compliance 
framework  and how they tailor points for individuals to ensure that they don't incur payment suspensions and 
demerits . We've been proactively working with all 43 of the providers to understand  that.  
We also have an assurance process within my division that routinely reviews payment suspensions, application 
of demerits and financial penalties in order to ensure they 're appropriate . But it is a high figure. I acknowledge 
that. Further work needs to be done to unpack that to see what's happening on the ground.  
Senator RICE:   That's where I want to go to. Have you got any idea why it is so high? In particular, I'm 
interested in the d iscrepancy between Work force Australia 's 70 per cent. W e've had Workforce Australia Online  
figures  going up from 23.8 per cent  to 39  per cent , so they've both gone up considerably. Why is there the 
discrepancy between the Work force Australia service providers compared with the  online?  
Ms M Ryan :  For Work force Australia service providers, a large driver of payment suspensions is related to 
participants ' non-attendance at provider appointments. There are  only very limited occasions in Work force 
Australia Online that a participant would be obliged to attend a phone appointment with our contact centre, but a 
large proportion of the payment suspensions with providers is related to missed appointments.  
Senator RICE:   As you say, often the se suspensions are then changed and people don't have their payments 
suspended because the people  have a very legitimate reason for why they couldn't make their appointments , for 
example . 
Ms M Ryan :  Yes. 
Senator RICE:   I've had many cases brought to my attention of people who have told their Work force 
Australia provider that they can't make an appointment for a very good reason and yet they're still suspended.  
Dr O'Rance :  Yes, demerits would  be the best way of looking at that. A payment suspension that doesn't 
become a demerit means that there was a good reason.  
Senator RICE:   Have you done any analysis of that?  
Dr O'Rance :  Yes. We've got the details  on demerits , particularly by reason.  I can talk through that a bit, 
comparing the online versus the services. I gave Senator Cash the overall figures for the number of people who 
received a demerit . For Work force Australia Online , overwhelmingly the largest number of events there are 
related to the points based period. That's where a person didn't meet their points target or they didn't meet their job 
search target. That's 85 per cent of demerits in Work force Australia Online . In Workforce Australia services, not 
meeting their points target was also the largest category, but it's 60 per cent. With Workforce Australia services, 
39 per cent of demerits are related to appointments. That's where  the person missed an appointment and it was 
determined that there  wasn't a valid reason.  Whereas for suspensions  it's much   
Senator RICE:   Have you done any analysis that shows how many of those suspensions didn't relate to 
demerits?  
Dr O'Rance :  We can provide what percentage of suspensions convert to demerit  to you on notice . 
Senator RICE:   So how much, you would legitimately say, is the fault of the Workforce Australia provider 
rather than the individual, if they are at an appointment or at work  many people who have contacted me are 
doing part -time work and have been told to come for an appointment at a totally unacceptable time.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 75 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Dr O'Rance :  There will be many cases where there is no fault  somebody had an appointment that was 
scheduled at a reasonable time and something happened that day, such as an emergency. We can certainly provide 
that conversion rate for you.  
Senator RICE:   It's correct, isn't it, that the employment providers have the power to automatically suspend 
income support payments  so those private providers , rather than it being the responsibility of government?  
Ms M Ryan :  They have  a delegated power to do that for missed appointments . With failing to meet a points 
target or job search , that's a little more binary because it 's usually on the individual to upload that evidence . If 
they aren't able to do that the provider can do that on their behalf , but that's something the individual is obliged to 
do. With the appointments , the provider can submit a non -attendance report if a participant hasn't attended at the 
time they believed they should have been attending and without a valid reason.  
Ms James :  Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think the legislative framework requires providers to report non -
attendance . 
Ms M Ryan :  They are ; that's right . 
Ms James :  There are a couple of dimensions here that I really want us to look into . There is provider 
discretion here. For example, how many meetings is the provider asking the person to come to? Are they 
consulting with the person about timing to make sure they're not being asked to go to a meeting when they're at 
work , which is where you want them to be ? 
Senator RICE:   If you've got 70 per cent of your people being suspended , there's a lot of that going on.  
Ms James :  I didn't have a comparison point because I wasn't here for the last system, but I was concerned 
about that number . Our legislative framework, as it currently  stands  with the way mutual obligations is 
operationalised in legislation and guidelines  I think providers are required to sus pend for non -attendance at 
appointments. There  is then a period of two business days where the participant  can reconnect , and if they do that 
with a reasonable excuse then it is cancelled out . With  the initial suspension, I don't think there is a choice on the 
provider around that under the legislation.  
Senator RICE:   No, but the choice is  the provider choosing the time s, to tell them , 'You've got to come to an 
appointment at three o'clock  on a Wednesday afternoon ', when  the person then says they 're at work.  They would 
have the choice, if t he person contacts  them  and says, 'I can't make a meeting at three o'clock on Wednesday 
afternoon because I'm at work ', to reschedule th at meeting.  
Ms James :  Absolutely.  
Senator RICE:   But they're not doing that.  
Ms James :  The point I'm trying to make is there are dynamics here within the discretion of providers , and 
then there are certain things where the system expects them to behave in certain ways and they don't have a 
discretion. You're quite right ; if a person can't make an appointment and they call the provider right beforehand , 
then that obligation hasn't kicked in because they can have the discussion about the reasonableness of that 
beforehand . But i f they miss the  appointment , at that point I think the provider doesn't really have a lot of choice . 
I guess there are a range of things that could happen then, but the legislation uses some pretty stark language 
around non -attendance.  
Ms M Ryan :  The protocol is for providers , if they've missed an appointment , to contact the participant to say : 
'Hey, you missed your appointment at 11 o'clock. Follow up. ' If they haven't heard back from the participant  on 
the day of that appointment , they will upload a notification  to say that that person   
Senator RICE:   The case s that have been  brought before me are  of people who have gone  out of their way to 
tell their provider the ir appointment time does not work for them. Do you monitor which private  employment  
providers are making the most suspensions?  
Ms M Ryan :  Yes, we do . 
Senator RICE:   Can you table some information for us about that . 
Ms M Ryan :  We can take that  on notice . 
Senator RICE:   Can you tell us which providers suspend the most amount of payments  so the top five 
providers suspending payments?  
Dr O'Rance :  We woul d have to do those calculations ; we would want to take into account case loads  but we 
can provide that with some time.  
Senator RICE:   Anti-poverty activists have called this arrangement with providers  'a shadow bureaucracy 
with vested interests'. There was a Saturday Paper article that pointed out:  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 76 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE    the job providers use the threat of payment suspensions to ensure engagement   
from income support recipients   
and, in turn, their own income stream from lucrative government contracts and bonuses that are pegged to particular types of 
required activity.  
Is the government concerned about this, given that 70 per cent of payments have been suspended?  
Ms James :  In terms of the government's concerns, that's probably a question for the minister. I will say that 
we have briefed the minister's advis ers on these issues , and these issues  around the role of different players in the 
system ha ve been at the forefront of the Work force Australia parliamentary inquiry . As the employment secretary, 
which is how I'm defined in social security law, there are quite a few powers I have that are delegated to many 
different parties in our system , including to providers. These obligations are delegated from me under social 
security legislation , as they also are delegated to Services Australia and other agencies and departments . There are 
a number of entities involved in effectively regulating this system and the compliance elements of it , and that's 
something the inquiry into Work force Australia  has heard a lot about.  
Senator RICE:   I know the  ACOSS c hief executive , Cassa ndra Goldie , wrote to Minister Burke requesting a 
halt to suspensions in the middle of a cost -of-living crisis , and told him that only appropriate personnel at 
Services Australia should be  able to  suspend  payments  as a last resort. In response, Minister Burke refused and 
warne d there could be some  substantial negative effects on the system  without due consideration . What does 
Minister Burke mean by 'negative effects ', particularly the negative effect of 70 per cent of people having their 
payment suspended in comparison?  Have you done any modelling or research to inform what th ose negative 
effects might be?  
Ms Lauman:   There is definitely strong evidence to suggest that having mutual obligations in place play s an 
important role in the reduction of long -term unemployment . When looking at removing suspensions, it 's important 
to understand how that sits within a system. There is a risk , because of the way suspensions  work as a trigger for 
conversations with jobseekers , particularly th ose conversation s with Services Australia where we look to ensure 
that they're in the right support stream , that if  you remove those triggers we could end up in a system where 
people get hit with a demerit before there are opportunities for them to have conversations and have those flow 
through. It 's that kind of impact on the system that needs to be considered.  
Senator RICE:   How  do you compare that with the harm that is being done particularly t o vulnerable 
participants? On the last figures, where we had  a much lower amount of suspensions  in the previous financial 
year we're now at 70 per cent.  Even on the last figures , we had 79.4 per cent of Indigenous participants being 
suspended , 76 per cent of people  identified  as having drug or alcohol related  issues  and 65 per cent of people 
having  mental health problems. Given you're now up to 7 0 per cent of suspensions , I suspect the number s for 
those particular cohorts  would be even  higher. This is alarming  the damage that  is being done to people.  
Ms Lauman:   The work Ms Ryan 's division  is doing  directly with providers , to look at  not only  how they're 
applying the targeted compliance framework but how they're tailor ing PBAS  points to ensure that people's 
requirements are commensurate with their capability , is trying to get ahead of that.  
Senator RICE:   It just sounds like words to me.  You're not safeguarding vulnerable people at all. The whole 
system is having massive impacts on incredibly vulnerable people.  
CHAIR:   Senator Rice, I'll now go to Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   Can I g o back to the discussion  we have been having in relation to the employment white 
paper. Just in  terms of the definition of the Treasurer , in terms of the non-accelerating inflation rate of  
unemployment  or NAIRU, as it's called:  do you agree that keeping employment at a sustainable level without 
impacting inflation is a very narrow and technical assumption?  
Ms James :  I'm not an economist and I 'm not responsible for this part of government policy, so I  wouldn't 
proffer an opinion on that.  
Senator CASH:   That's fine. You've got the Julian Hill report coming down. We've talked about the reform of 
the is it the Local Jobs Program?  In terms of the fiscal risk of redesigning employment services at what is 
absolutely accepted as a historically low unemployment figure, has the department provided any advice to the 
minister , regarding the potential fiscal costs  of what could be higher employment service caseloads , on the cost of 
any reforms?  
Ms James :  We don't have a reform blueprint yet. We're awaiting a parliamentary inquiry report. Of course, 
we'll advise the minister and the government about the recommendations in that report when it's handed down. 
The government will need to consider those recommendations. Certainly, I would say that everyone is very Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 77 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  conscious that anything to be done here  need s to be carefully considered and worked through. One of the 
principles outlined in the white paper in relation to employment services is that reforms are grounded in evidence, 
high-quality evaluation, continuous learning and improvement . So that is absolutely something that we'll be 
looking at. We now have Dr Leigh as a minister in our portfolio. He has been working with our data and 
evaluation teams on a range of ways in which we might think about how to ensure that we do have an evidence 
base before we move.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. In terms of the employment white paper, I have missed a question. When was 
Minster Burke briefed on the final draft of the employment white paper?  
Ms James :  I'd need to take that on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Take it on notice; that's fine. In terms of the constant communication on the 
interdepartmental committees that you sat on in relation to the Department of Employment and Workplace 
Relations and Treasury and the actual drafting of  what was the final employment white paper , did you provide 
any input to Treasury regarding the role of industrial relations in a productive labour market?  
Ms James :  Our industrial relations people were certainly involved in these discussions , and I think the answer 
to that would probably be yes . We would have provided input on workplace relations. I will s ay that those people 
have just been released , so p recisely the nature of what was talked about   
Senator CASH:   If I need anything further, that's fine. There 's an OECD economic outlook report that came 
out in September, and it's called for more labour market flexibility to boost productivity. Is the department aware 
of that report?  
Ms James :  I'm not personally aware but  
Ms Huender:   I'm not personally aware. We can take that on notice. I'll check with the team.  
Ms James :  We can take it on notice.  
Senator CASH:   Did you analyse it  in particular , the references there to the flexibility  that's actually required 
to have that productive workforce but also the interplay with the proposed industrial relations changes, if any.  
Ms James :  Certainly.  
Senator CASH:   There is another report  the e61 Institute report.  
Ms James :  I'm familiar with e61.  
Ms Huender:   Which one?  
Senator CASH:   It's an analysis from the e61 Institute, looking at it more in a European context, that found 
laws like the proposals that went through in December last year have led to anti -competitive outcomes in Europe. 
Is that something that you've looked at?  
Ms James :  We'd need to take that on notice. I think that the people who would most likely know are the 
people from the workplace relations outcome who have been dispatched.  
Senator CASH:   That's not a problem at all. That 's all that I have at this stage  on the employment white paper. 
Can I turn to  and you did say that you 'd spoken to them recently  the N ESA  conference. In terms of the 
department and its responsibility, the department has responsibility for the quality framework.  
Ms Lauman:   Yes. I think that's right.  
Senator CASH:   I was going to go t hrough  a list, if that's alright. Licensing of non -government providers.  
Ms Lauman:   That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   The w orkforce standards . 
Ms Lauman:   I'm just going to refer to colleagues here.  
Mr Beasley :  I'm not sure what the workforce standards are.  
Senator CASH:   I'm just going through what was actually in Mr Hill's speech . Pricing.  
Ms James :  Okay.  
Senator CASH:   I'm going through Mr Hill's speech , in terms of the areas that were outlined.  
Ms Lauman:   I think some of that was a reflection of a functionality that Mr Hill was envisaging for the 
future.  
Senator CASH:   That's what I wanted to confirm.  
Ms Lauman:   Some of those responsibilities  are core departmental responsibilities now. Some of them may 
reflect a slight reframing  of  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 78 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   And that's what I wanted to explore . Thank you for that. When I was reading it, I could n't 
quite align the current responsibilities. These are not the current responsibilities. Quality framework, yes ; 
licensing of non-government providers, yes ; workforce standards, not at this point in time.  
Mr Beasley :  Not at this time , no. 
Senator CASH:   Pricing?  
Mr Beasley :  We set pricing , yes. 
Senator CASH:   Yes, you do.  Complaints and investigations ? 
Mr Beasley :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   Data transparency?  
Mr Beasley :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   And the continuous learning and quality improvement?  
Mr Beasley :  Yes. 
Ms Lauman:   In partnership with  providers  that last element.  
Senator CASH:   Okay.  Am I correct in saying that there are fewer  than 100 providers currently delivering 
employment services?  
Ms James :  Are we talking Workforce Australia?  
Senator CASH:   Yes, Workforce Australia.  
Ms Lauman:   Workforce Australia  has 40 providers across the 51 regions.  
Senator CASH:   So it must be the whole thing, then.  
Ms Lauman:   There are duplications between some of these because some providers do multiple programs. 
We have 22 CTA providers , 22 employability skills providers , 23 self -employment assistance providers , 53 
ParentsN ext providers and 37 transition to work providers. And as I said, there will be duplication across   
Senator CASH:   And that's why  the number is  yes; I understand. When you look at the speech, the concept 
around the introduction of a body to regulate those providers , is that something the department is currently doing 
work on?  
Ms James :  We need to be careful here. This is the chair of a committee talking to a conference of employment 
service providers. This doesn't amount to government policy or a request from government , and nor is it the 
committee report. We would await that. We're  not actively doing any work on this as at this point in time. We are 
familiar with the speech, and of course we listen ed to it with great interest.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you for saying that  because that was the issue with the speech . Let's just say that it 
elicited a conversation about if this was actually the policy the government was going to be pursuing , but at this 
point in time you're saying it was the chair of a committee who gave the speech. So  the department did not draft 
the speech ? 
Ms James :  Goodness, no ! 
Senator CASH:   Understood ! 
Ms James :  Have you met Mr Hill?  
Senator CASH:   There was quite a lot of interest piqued  when the speech was actually given.  
Senator Watt:   He's an ideas man.  
Senator CASH:   Yes! 
Ms James :  He has many ideas   
Senator CASH:   He does.  
Ms James :  and he  does talk about his ideas out loud  in committee hearings and the like . I don't know that 
there was anything in the speech that surprised me in terms of the sorts of things that he 's been testing and the 
committee has been testing  and the submissions that have been put to him in the committee. I gather that in some 
overseas jurisdictions there are independent bodies involved with these sorts of functions , but we haven't had that 
here in Australia. We're some distance away from having a government policy to this effect , and we await with 
keen interest the report.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. Thank you for the clarification.  It was a very nice way to put it : 'an ideas man '. I 
accept that. I want to go to the ESS online system . Is it meeting user expectations?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 79 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms M Ryan :  We replaced our previous system that a number of providers were familiar with in July last year.  
This system is called ESS 2.0. It was a foundational uplift  in capability to move to the new policy settings and the 
like. We have heard from some providers that they were expecting some other functionality that 's not there at the 
moment. I'm acknowledging that there was some functionality in the previous system  that we didn't uplift to the 
new system. On the whole the system is working as it has been built and delivered , but we're looking at 
opportunities to enhance and improve . It does require funding, so  we need to find the resources to do that. We 
absolutely are working proactively with providers ; if they  identify areas that we could enhance  or refine  then we 
will absolutely do that. But it is predicated on additional funding to be able to do that further investment.  
Senator CASH:   Just in terms of a line of questioning , again going to Mr Hill's speech. In his speech he quotes 
providers sharing frustrations in light of time spent in admin using 'DEWR's terribly inefficient online ESS 
system '. That's why I want ed to explore that comment , because he 'd obviously shared that at the NESA 
conference.  In your evidence  you said , 'They were expecting some other functionalit ies that haven't  been 
uploaded into this system. ' Why were n't they uploaded into this system , and what functionalit ies were they 
looking for?  
Ms M Ryan :  I might have to take on notice the specificity of some of those functions, but there were some 
functions under the previous system that were n't being used by providers , but they now say  they were using them. 
We did do user engagement with those providers . I'm not saying it 's a perfect system . When we got the funding 
for what I will call tranche 1, it was a foundational capability. We had intended that we might have gone back to 
get future tranches of funding , but for a range of government priorities  we didn't get that. We 've been working 
through the current system . As it says, it does all the things that it 's required to do, but there are some things that 
are a bit clunky  that's my language ; I'm not an IT person  where I think we could make some further changes.  
Senator CASH:   I actually like your language . I think it 's very good.  
Ms M Ryan :  As I said, we will roll out new functionality where we can to improve the user experience , 
because the last thing we want is for providers and their staff to be focused on administrative tasks rather than 
being able to support participants on their pathway to employment. Those opportunities where we can make those 
enhancements  we absolutely will , but we need funding to do that.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you, Chair.  I'm happy to hand over the call.  
Senator RICE:   I want to move onto the employment fund. Thank you for providing some information in 
response to my letter to you. The stated purpose of the employment fund is to reimburse providers for the 
purchase of eligible goods and services needed for participants to get and keep a job. Is there a requirement for 
the employment fund to be offered to individuals , or is it at the discretion  of the provider ? 
Ms Tran :  There is not a requirement on the provider to expressly provide support through the employment  
fund to participants . We do expect providers to access a range of support s, and that could be through the 
employment  fund, but it could be through other government services as well.  
Senator RICE:   So how do income support  recipients  know that this resource could be available to them ? 
Ms Tran :  In terms of our expectation of providers, I think we've mentioned in one of our QONs to you 
previously, or one of the QONs that we have tabled, it is about the discussion between  providers and the 
participant in terms of understanding what needs and supports the participant needs . It's up to the provider to then 
identify where those supports could come from . We also have  information on our website around the types of 
support that a participant could access . Additionally, we have a couple of pages on our website when the 
participant logs into it Workforce Australia for Individuals online . There is a supports page. While it doesn't say 
'employment fund', it outlines the type s of support.  
Senator RICE:   Your answer to my question about the amount of employme nt fund credits that have been 
allocated show that only 41.2 per cent of the credits they could have allocated have been allocated. That's correct, 
isn't it?  
Ms Tran :  Yes. 
Senator RICE:   So 58.8 per cent of the potential credits that could have been given weren't given. Is it in line 
with your expectations from when the employment fund was set up that almost two -thirds of the available credits 
wouldn't be used by providers?  
Ms Tran :  I wouldn't say that. They haven't yet been drawn down on. Those credits are there for the provider 
for as long as they have their contract. We don't have an expectation in terms of a time frame in which they 
should be utilising the employment  fund.  
Senator RICE:   So the credits aren't topped up at particular  intervals?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 80 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Tran :  The notional credits are allocated when a participant starts on their caseload and commences on the 
provider's caseload. For every new participant that the provider commences, that participant attracts a notional 
credit. In that sense, it does get topped up according to the number  of participants who come through, but it's a 
notional credit; we don't expect a particular  amount to be spent on any one participant. Some participants might 
need a lot of support while others don't. For example, relocation costs are generally high -cost items, so we'd 
expect that where they're supporting participants to relocate to take up an employment  opportunity . That would be 
a higher cost than a work boot, for example.  
Senator RICE:   So if you had somebody who has become unemployed, and might be on unemployment for a 
long time, would you have an expectation that more of those credits would be used  in relocation, for example, and 
that it would be fairly early on in their journey towards employment ? 
Ms Tran :  Certainly, in terms of relocation costs. They have to have secured an employment opportunity  that's 
90 minutes away from where they're currently situated . Relocation costs can be drawn on only if there is actually 
an employment opportunity.  
Senator RICE:   I'll take some time to go through the information  that you've given me, but it seems to me that 
the credits not committed by providers  and at 60 per cent it's almost two -thirds  means the employment fund 
isn't being well -enough used compared to how it could be used. Would you concur with that?  
Ms M Ryan :  Historically, the employment fund has been underutilised. What we're seeing is not  I'm not 
going to say 'alarming', but we are monitoring it. It is in the interest of the provider  to utilise it, in accordance with 
the appropriate categories, to help those participants to resolve vocational and nonvocational barriers. We 
regularly ask them: 'What are you doing? How are you expending your employment fund?' We work with them to 
better unpack that  
Senator RICE:   Are you tracking how different  providers are using the employment fund?  
Ms M Ryan :  Yes. 
Ms Tran :  We have looked at the providers who have not drawn down on the employment fund as much, and 
we have reached out to them. We are providing support to those providers in the event that they don't know how 
to access the employment fund or aren't aware of the flexibilities that currently exist in the employment fund. We 
work quite closely with our stakeholders.  
Senator RICE:   I'm not sure whether what I asked for on notice covered  particular  funds and how much they 
were using the employment fund.  If I haven't, could you take that on notice?  
Ms M Ryan :  I don't think there was a specific question in there, but we can take that on notice.  
Senator RICE:   Can you take on notice to break  it down for particular  employment providers and how they 
are accessing the fund? Last estimates I asked for detail about the effectiveness  of the employment fund  and the  
available credits, and you said you would be looking at that in the evaluation. You took it on notice but didn't 
provide  any methodology that you were going to be using in assessing the effectiveness of the employment fund. 
Have you since finalised that methodology?  
Mr Cunningham :  It is still something we are investigating. I'm not sure if we've discussed previously that the 
employment fund, for a variety of reasons, is quite a challenging area to evaluate , from the point of view of the 
data collection and a number of limitations with that. But it is something we are continuing to work at   
Senator RICE:   So you haven't found the methodology to do it yet?  
Mr Cunningham :  We haven't found a methodology that will work, given the current data limitations.  
Senator RICE:   Yet you're spending a lot of money on the whole system , without a good methodology for 
evaluating its effectiveness. We've got evidence that it's actually not being very well used.  
Mr Cunningham :  To clarify, what we are looking for is the best-quality evidence possible for that impact  
analysis evaluation  of the employment fund. There are a variety of ways that we 'll be looking at the effectiveness, 
and we 'll be looking   
Senator RICE:   Okay. You'll have to take that on notice, and I look forward to receiving the methodology as 
soon as you 've finalised it.  
Mr Cunningham :  Sure.  
Senator RICE:   I note that zero dollars has been spent on the provid er Indigenous mentoring capability. Could 
you provide an explanation as to why that's the case?  
Ms Tran :  The Indigenous mentoring category is there to support providers in uplifting their own staff to 
deliver culturally appropriate programs   Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 81 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator RICE:   And so none of them have done that.  
Ms Tran :  It is a n application to the department. We have had one application since Workforce Australia 
started. We've approved that because we have system   
Senator RICE:   One.  
Ms Tran :  We've had one and we've approved it.  
Senator RICE:   How many employment providers are there?  
Ms Tran :  Forty -three.  
Senator RICE:   And you've had one. Perhaps you could take on notice any work that you 're doing to 
encourage providers to utilise the service.  
Ms Tran :  Sure.  
Senator RICE:   The Service s Australia website states that participants are eligible for the employment fund 
'within 183 calendar days after being ex ited or transferred ' from a provider. Can you tell me how many 
participants have access ed the fund after being exited from a provider?  
Ms Tran :  I'll have to take that on notice.  
Senator RICE:   Okay. And do you have any reports of participants being denied access to the employment 
fund after being exited?  
Ms Tran :  I'll take that on notice . 
Senator RICE:   I've got a few other bits there that I won't go through and that I 'll also get you to take on 
notice. The employment fund provider handbook states that paying for short -term living costs such as food, bills 
and rent is an acceptable use of the employment fund. D o you  know how well this is being used, and do you have 
reports of claims being denied for short -term living costs?  
Ms Tran :  I will have to take that on notice.  
Senator RICE:   I also want to go to the payments to related entities , where I think you've provided me with 
some more information. Have you improved your ability to track whether training programs through related 
entities , rather than commitments to j ob providers within their own organisation , are being  how much funding is 
being provided to training within related entities?  
Ms Tran :  Is that through use of the employment fund?  
Senator RICE:   Yes. 
Ms Lauman:   At last estimates we ha d visibility of our own entity organisations, and we 've been able to 
progress that work, since last estimates, to have a much stronger view of related entity referrals as well. There 's a 
working group within the department that's been focused on working with providers to get clarity around who 
those entities are, to allow us track at that more granular level.  
Senator RICE:   I haven't had a chance to look through what you've given me at the moment, but you've 
provided information  in this   
CHAIR:   Senator Rice, this is your final question.  
Senator RICE:   Okay.  I really wanted to get your response to the Antipoverty Centre and GetUp's  Punishment 
for profit  report and, in particular, the response to this report  by the department , which said the survey wasn't a 
representative sample and that 'Where a participant has an issue, like the one s detailed in the report, they can call 
the national customer service line. Then , if the issue is complex , the department will investigate the issue.' That 
didn't seem, to me, to go to the issues that were outlined in this report. I know that we 're very short on time, but I 
wanted to know what happens during an investigation.  
Ms M Ryan :  Of a complaint?  
Senator RICE:   Yes.  
Ms M Ryan :  If it's a general complaint to the national customer service line and if a participant has called the 
customer service line, often what we will do is we will see if we can do firsthand resolution  so maybe encourage 
the participant to have a discussion with the provider directly. If they're not comfortable doing that, we'll seek 
permission from the participant to act on their behalf and to follow that up with the provider. I might just refer to 
Ms MacDonald in terms of the actual time frames and so forth in terms of resolution, but we do try to resolve the 
issue as efficiently as possible and at that first call , if we can.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 82 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator RICE:   Jumping to the pointy bit : if you find that the provider has acted inappropriately, what action 
does the department take? For the potential harm caused, does the person who made the complaint get an apology 
or any restitution?  
Ms MacDonald :  What will happen is that, if there is a response from the provider and if it is unsatisfactory 
from the participant's point of view, we ask for the account lead to have a conversation with the provider . That 
will mean that a conversation is had and then there will be a discussion in terms of ways that they could improve. 
That's the process.  
Senator RICE:   There's a discussion. W here it has been found that the provider has acted inappropriately, 
have there been examples where people have had apologies  or any restitution or  compensation ? 
Ms M Ryan :  I'm not  aware of any compensation.  We'd have to take that on notice. In terms of apologies   
Ms MacDonald :  Absolutely.  
Ms M Ryan :  there are instances when not just the department but the specific provider will have made 
apologies. I don't have examples in front of me, but they certainly do happen.  
Senator RICE:   Do you track that?  
Ms M Ryan :  I'm not sure if we do. We can take it on notice and see what we can do.  
Senator RICE:   If you can take that on notice. In that report, out of 600 people, nearly half experienced 
bullying or abuse of power   
CHAIR:   Excuse me, Senator Rice , you're well over time. Senator Davey.  
Senator DAVEY:   Thank you very much. I have some questions on the PALM scheme. It is correct that , at the 
end of June this year , the government introduced new Pacific Australia Labour Mobility scheme deeds and 
guidelines , which are, effectively, a contract between the government and prospective or approved  accredited 
employers?  
Mr Stott :  In broad terms, yes. The new scheme deed and guidelines were introduced commencing in July  so 
broadly enough, end of June.  
Senator DAVEY:   Was a process of consultation under taken prior to the introduction of those guidelines?  
Mr Stott :  Yes. As I recall we went through this last estimates . Ms Duffy is here. If it's helpful, Senator, we 
can take you through the process of consultation.  
Senator DAVEY:   You're right. It was discussed at the last estimates, but I'm just seeking some further 
information because  of what we've seen since in terms of  how much consultation was had with the National 
Farmers Federation, for example, or the Queensland Fruit & Vegetable Growers as part of the consultation. Have 
you got a breakdown  I'm happy for you to take it on notice  of the actual consultation, the number of meetings, 
where they were held and the key stakeholders that were met with?  
Mr Stott :  I think we can do a fair bit of that and, if we need to, take some on notice and come back with more. 
Broadly, consultation commenced in late 2021 and went all the way through to the weeks immediately preceding 
the release of the deed and guidelines. That's distinct from the consultation that's built into the operation of the 
scheme. Both those aspects  both that which  we did in terms of consulting on the new  deed and  guidelines and 
that which we do in the normal operation of the program  involve many of those stakeholders  that you just went 
through . I will ask Ms Duffy  to take us through a snapshot of that consultation that we went through  that include d 
the stakeholders  to give a bit of a sense of the frequency and the number of participants.  
Ms Duffy :  As Mr Stott said, the consultation started in December 2021 with drafting guidelines for 
consultation. That included webinars  and meetings  the regular meetings with stakeholders as well as some 
specifically on the deed and guidelines.  Formal submissions were received  over December and January. The 
feedback was considered , and a further release of the draft ing guidelines was issued in March  2022. T hen, there 
was a further round of consultations . Again, there were webinars, and meeting s with providers were  available . 
Then the PALM visa was introduced, but there was some legislation that  hadn't passed both houses before 
parliament was dissolved, so the new deed and guidelines were  not introduced at  that stage . Then, obviously, we 
went into  caretaker , and it wasn't un til after the government was formed again that we  looked at the deed and 
guidelines and looked at the revised settings . Then the revised settings were introduced  in late 2022, and w e 
undertook some consultations at the beginning of this year  at the beginning of 2023.  
We did those consultations over two phases . The first phase was from February to March, so we had quite a 
number of information sessions  and public webinars . We discussed the main new settings . I can run through what 
they were. We also had a workshop with  Pacific and Timor -Leste  partners. That included head s of mission , Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 83 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  country liaison officers and labour sending  units . That  was a two-day workshop in Brisbane in April. Then we 
release d the draft deed and guidelines in May . That was on 2 May this year. We had further consultations . Again, 
we had public webinars  and meetings. There were one -on-one meetings as well . We received submissions on 
those. I should have said that, through each of the processes  I've described , submissions were received. I can run 
through the number of submissions w e received . We also issued frequently asked questions during that time . 
Submissions closed  on that second period on 17 May . Then we , obviously , reflected on that feedback and 
finalised the deed and guidelines and published them and started to offer them to our existing  approved employers 
from 26 June.  
Senator DAVEY:   If you've taken on board all the feedback from industry through that time  I note there was 
a lot of work done prior to the PALM visa being introduced . It was introduced under the former government . But 
the feedback we're getting is that the new deed and guidelines that have now been released as of June are quite 
significantly different to the former. A press release that I have here from the Queensland Fruit & Vegetable 
Growers says, 'Now, instead of making it easier for small business, we have a suite of changes that would, 
effectively, lock them out of PALM.' We're getting reports that some approved employers are seeking to leave the 
scheme. Have you been receiving that feedback since the release of the new guidelines?  
Ms Duffy :  We've had all active employers return signed deeds, and we've executed the deeds from all our 
active employers . So all employers that had workers under the Seasonal Worker Program deed, or the Pacific 
Labour Scheme deed, accepted the offer and returned executed deeds.  
Senator DAVEY:   Was that for the same number of employees or are there changes to the number of 
employees?  
Ms Duffy :  The way that it works is  that the first step is to have an active deed, and then employers put in 
recruitment plan requests , and that 's where they specify the number of workers  that they're seeking to recruit, and 
then each of those recruitment requests is assessed.  So there's no commitment from an employer who  signs a deed 
to actually proceed with recruiting . It's entirely up to them . After they've done the ir labour market testing or if 
they've got it already in an active labour market test that  they haven't filled  the vacant positions , they can request 
recruitment workers , and they can do so multiple times . It's not one bite , so to speak.  
Senator DAVEY:   I won't  jump around too much , but I'm  getting different feedback about the level of 
employers or the satisfaction of employers . I'm being told that there are at least three small to medium  sized 
companies that all inten d to reduce or eliminate their PALM  workforce , which could be up to  150 workers each , 
due to the impact of the deed and guidelines. Have  you got a comment on  that?  
Mr Stott :  I will start. In addition to the 93 per cent of the previous approved employers who signed the deed, 
more join ed. We completed  the implementation of the new scheme deed and guidelines with about 452 approved 
employe rs, and we started with  424. The recruitment requests for new workers for the current month  were on 
average. So the year -to-date monthly average  is about 2,400 w orkers , and, for the current month, there were 
requests  for 2 ,413. For the next month , it's 4,800 -plus, which is double the normal monthly average. So, at t he 
conclusion of the implementation of the deed and guidelines , there  are consistent , and then  increas ingly  stronger , 
requests for workers under the program.  
Senator DAVEY:   So, in comparison to figures released by the department in July, which showed recruitment 
within the horticultural industry had reduced six per cent between June and July, you're saying that has now 
turned around. Is that your evidence?  
Mr Stott :  My evidence is that  that's the number of workers  that were requested . That could be short  term or 
long term, but that's the number of workers requested . What you're describing is the usual seasonal variation for 
short -term agriculture  deployments . When we compare this year to last year, on average,  for the three months 
over winter , we have an additional 6 ,000 workers  in the short stream alone, over that three -month period.  So it's 
telling me that there continues to be strong  demand for PALM workers in seasonal agriculture , including across 
what we normally would see as the seasonal dip  through winter . 
Senator DAVEY:   I don't think anyone   
CHAIR:   Senator Davey, you said one or two questions.  
Senator DAVEY:   Could I have five more minutes? I don't think anyone is denying that there is demand out 
there . There is absolutely demand right across agriculture for the PALM worker scheme . What we 're being told is 
that the new guidelines are making it harder . There's more red tape involved . The requirement to provide a 
minimum of 30 hours a week  in a very variable industry is putting requirements on employers that will see many 
of them questioning the value  of the scheme,  with the return of the backpacker workforce . A lot of employers are 
now looking at backpackers , where they don't have the same level of restrictions. I'm getting a lot of feedback and  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 84 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  so are my colleagues. Mr Stott,  before I lose the call : did you, at a recent conference, meet with a Professor  Philip 
Martin from the University of California?  
Mr Stott :  No, but I did meet with an American who was in Australia, I think on his own leave, who requested 
to meet. He spoke with me about the H -2A visa scheme in the United States. I forget his name, but it's a pretty 
strong coincidence. It could be the same individual.  
Senator DAVEY:   So it could have been Professor Philip Martin.  
Mr Stott :  I apologise. There was a   
Senator DAVEY:   If you've got a diary note , could you please take  it on notice ? 
Mr Stott :  I'll take it on notice  absolutely.  
Senator DAVEY:   The allegation has been made that during the meeting you told Professor Martin that it's 
this government's policy to reduce the size of the PALM scheme and that's why the deed and guidelines , from an 
industry perspective , are so tough to comply with. Would you have a recollection of that meeting?  
Mr Stott :  I recall a meeting with a person who that could be . That's  not a comment I've ever made.  
Senator DAVEY:   You're not refusing to work with industry to resolve any issues with the current guidelines? 
You're still working towards  an iterative process , which  you said is going on ? You're still willing to work with 
industry?  
Mr Stott :  Absolutely. In fact, Ms Duffy is  preparing to do more of that in coming  days. 
Ms Duffy :  We have a workshop scheduled at this stage for mid -November, working through any changes that 
might need to be made to the guidelines to make them more easily understood and easy to comply with . So, we're 
not changing the settings  but just looking at if there's a word that's being misunderstood or if it the addition of 
extra explanatory notes or something  would help . We're working with industry to address that.  
Senator DAVEY:   Finally, one for the minister  because  I've got to justify you sitting here so patiently  and I 
need to acknowledge you.  For both yourself and for the minister you're representing today, agriculture is a very 
important area , and t he PALM scheme provid es a very important role in the agriculture sector. Have you met , in 
your role as agriculture minister , and are you aware of whether Minister Burke has met , with some of the core 
stakeholders like the National Farmers Federation or the horticulture industry representatives to discuss some of 
the concerns or issues they have with the new deeds and guidelines?  
Senator Watt:   I certainly have. My office did, on many occasions, and continues to.  But I certainly met with 
a number of the agricultural groups and trade unions , who ha d different perspectives , because we are a 
government who listens to all sides of an argument. I had a number of discussions with Minister Burke about the 
issue at the time. As for whether Minister Burke met with any of those agricultural groups, I'm pretty confident 
that he at least spoke to some of them by telephone . Whether he did in person I'm not sure. I don't know whether 
any of the officials know anything more than that.  
Senator DAVEY:   Could you take it on notice and just ask, and potentially table that?  
Senator Watt:   Sure. And, Senator Davey, could I just make one point . I don't know whether we went over 
this at the last estimates . The rational e for making these changes, which were arrived at after a lot of consultation, 
was that we were getting too many reports from Pacific workers, from Pacific nations, from unions  and from 
church  based groups who support those Pacific workers  a range of different groups  that on too many 
occasions Pacific workers were being brought to Australia essentially on the promise of work  and, in coming 
across, they obviously incurred fees . They usually pa y deductions to their employer for accommodation, transport  
and other things. They would come to Australia on the promise of work, not receive work, would end up in debt 
to their employer because they weren't getting work but they were paying  deductions and , in the worst case 
scenario, were actually having to have  money sent from the Pacific to Australia to support them until they got 
work . This  is exact ly the  opposite of how this scheme is supposed to work, where,  the whole point of th e scheme 
from the Pacific's point of view is that people get work  and send remittances home . 
I'm absolutely not saying that that happened in all cases . There are many excellent relationships between 
particular employers and their workers . It's overall a very successful scheme and a really important part of our 
agricultural workforce, but we couldn't ignore those issues that were coming to us , and that 's what has led to those 
changes.  
I'm well aware there are a number of agricultural groups that are n't happy about those changes , and we 
continue to discuss it with them . But, as Mr Stott has said, it would appear , at this point at least, that we 've 
actually got more deeds be ing entered into tha n we've had happen before . I think it 's in November that we 're 
forecast to have more PALM workers come to Australia than in any  other month before . So it would appear that Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 85 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  the scheme is continuing to work and will provide benefits to employers here in Australia and also to Pacific 
families.  
Senator DAVEY:   You've addressed that side  and those concerns . Has anything been done in these changes to 
the deeds and guidelines to address the flip side, which is the issue of abscondment?  
Senator Watt:   It's interesting you raise that . You know how I said that we were getting issues raised by 
Pacific nations, unions and other groups ? The point that many of them were making, including Pacific nations, 
was that the fact that there wasn't a minimum amount that people needed to receive on a regular basis was a key 
reason why people were disengaging from the scheme. What we hope and expect will come from these changes is 
that they will be one factor that brings down disengagement, and that's obviously good for employers as well as 
the workers.  
Senator DAVEY:   It would be. One of the concerns I have raised is that employe rs have no recourse . If they 
have people abscond from the scheme and they disappear, there 's no action taken on the visas. There 's no action 
taken for the employers. Some of them , very legitimate employers , can't recoup the fees that they've paid.  
Senator Watt:   That is absolutely a valid concern. It's been raised with me by a lot of the agricultural groups. 
There's a bunch of other work happening within government around the migration review . The portability of visas  
is an issue that's being looked at, and that may deal with those  concerns , but, obviously,  no decision s have been 
made at this point in time.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash.  
Senator CASH:   I was going to continue on the line of questioning in relation to PALM , if that's alright ? 
CHAIR:   Yes. 
Senator CASH:   In terms of the operation of the new PALM IT system  just following on from the 
questions  you have introduced the new IT system for approved employers?  
Mr Stott :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   When was that introduced?  
Mr Stott :  We have a new system. It was introduced in July. It went live on 25 July. If I've stated the wrong 
date, Ms Row e, who's joined me , will correct me.  
Senator CASH:   But it was recently introduced. It was July, August, September, October.  
Mr Stott :  It was introduced on 25 July.  
Senator CASH:   Can you go through how the department consulted with industry and our Pacific partners on 
the development  of the new IT system?  
Mr Stott :  Yes. The new IT system  has been built by the previous delivery partner, Pacific Labour Facility . A 
lot of that work was undertaken by the Pacific Labour Facility . The IT system hasn't yet transferred, as part of our 
insourcing, into the department's IT system. That's still being operated by the Pacific Labour Facility . I might 
hand over to Ms Row e, who can give us some better information.  
Ms Rowe :  The system launched on 25 July. I would have to take on notice the specific details of the 
consultation with industry and with the Pacific neighbours. Part of the system has also built an interface with the 
Pacific, so the Pacific can directly transfer data into the system and into the department as well. So there's a 
system which will actually record the detail of workers, but it will also have an interface with the Pacific itself.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of taking that on notice  as well , how many approved employers did the department 
consult with in terms of the PALM IS, as I understand it's referred to?  
Ms Rowe :  That's right.  
Senator CASH:   Was the system tested before its release?  
Ms Duffy :  There was some use.  
Ms Rowe :  There was some use.  
Senator CASH:   Could you just take me through what that testing process was?  
Mr Stott :  I can talk in general terms, but we'll need to go back , on notice , to the Pacific Labour Facility to get 
how they did the integration testing and the system testing and those kinds of things. I am aware that they did user 
acceptance testing with a cohort of approved emplo yees in the development of the system.  
Senator CASH:   Did you say employees or employers?  
Mr Stott :  Approved employers, with an approved employee cohort.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 86 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator CASH:   Could you  take on notice how many  approved  employers there were in terms of the testing?  
Consistent with the questions put by Senator Davey and i n terms of the discussions we've been having on the use 
of the new IT system, industry have advised that the transition to the new IT system has been very disruptive, that 
the system is not fit for purpose and that PALM worker recruitment requests could not be processed for over eight 
weeks, that it has been necessary for DEWR to implement a number of workarounds to keep the program going, 
like requesting employers to fill out paper forms to have worker accommodation approved. Is that correct?  
Mr Stott :  Like with any new system, as my colleague earlier described, new IT can be clunky. I think it's fair 
to say that our implementation has had its moments of clunk iness . Some of them were related to the system and 
some were related to how users of the system need ed to engage with it. For the long -term approved employer 
cohort , there had never been an online interface . The short -term cohort had had long -term access to the Seasonal 
Worker Program online system. The new system is quite different to the Seasonal Worker Program system and of 
course is a whole new way of managing the administration of the program for the long -term cohort, so we 
encountered some issues a s simple as authenticating users . Practices were needed to meet the contemporary 
operating environment for security . Users had to get used to that, as well as the functionality of the system  not 
quite meeting expectations. I'll go to Ms Saunders, but the headline as I understand it is that we have manage d the 
implementation to ensure that all deployment dates for PALM workers have been achieved.  
Ms S Saunders :  I think it's very fair to say that there has been some level of disruption to the normal routine 
of approved employers being able to do their recruitment plans. Of course, part of that is that the recruitment plan 
itself is quite a lengthy process in terms of the checks and balances we need to undertake to ensure the approved 
employer is actually in a position to ensure the worker 's safety , welfare and so on and to meet all the deed and 
guideline requirements. So there was that element of the new deed and guideline arrangements that go to the very 
heart of what we assess when we undertake the recruitment plan assessments but also everyone was getting used 
to how we work with it et cetera.  
We were acutely aware through the whole process, particularly once PALMIS  went live and people were 
starting to put in their recruitment plans, associated accommodation plans et cetera, that we were approaching a 
peak season for recruitment, so we were particularly mindful of how we orchestrated our internal resources so that 
we prioritised appropriate ly so that we avoided missing any recruitment dates. We had many conversations with 
approved employers on the ground. Normally when we receive a recruitment plan if there are bits and bobs that 
don't line up with everything that we need to be able to approve it we go back to the approved employer. We 
spent a lot of time having one -on-one conversations with those approved employers to help them understand what 
the transition involved in terms of meet ing the recruitment plan requirement s. We worked with them to help them 
understand that but also to give them clarity about what they could do next in order to get it over the line. In that 
respect it 's relevant to note that around 6 2 per cent of all our recruitment plans actually needed that work. So 
there 's a process w here w e get it in, do an assessment, send it back for further information , bring it back and then 
approve it. We were prioritising all of our recruitment plans based on the arrival date of the workers. So far  and 
this is something that we check every week  we have not missed a planned recruitment date.  
Senator CASH:   That was actually going to be one of my questions. So no -one has actually missed the date on 
which they actually wanted the workers to be available?  
Ms S Saunders :  Not from  the processing of the recruitment plans.  We have executed what we needed to do. 
We have engaged with the labour sending unit s. They 're aware  that there has been this slight disruption . They're 
doing things in a shortened time frame  as well  so that,  overall , no recruitment dates are missed.  
Senator CASH:   One of the issues raised  was that PALM worker recruitment requests could not be processed 
for over eight weeks. Is that something you 're aware of, even if it was n't for eight weeks but for  five weeks  or six 
weeks or seven weeks?  
Ms S Saunders :  Hard and fast , it was probably  overall around a six week blackout , because , when we had the 
transition to the new PALM system , there was a transition process where we needed to stop receiving new 
recruitment plans , finalise the ones we already had on deck  and wait the three or four weeks for the PALM IS 
system  to go live and then people could start going. So there was  that six-week period where people couldn't 
apply for new recruitment plans  et cetera.  
Senator CASH:   So they actually couldn't apply , which means that they may have been pushed out in terms of 
wanting to get workers here because they missed that six-week period there?  
Ms S Saunders :  Yes. But, by the same token, there was plenty of advice and guidance given to the approved 
employers in terms of their workforce planning so th at they were aware that the system would blackout  during  
this period  and that they wouldn't be able to submit recruitment plans during that period and  to get them all in Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 87 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  prior to this date  we will approve them so that that part is not disrupted  and then  they' d back online at the end 
of July to start putting in recruitment plans.  
Senator CASH:   Is the online system currently being used to process all worker recruitment s or is part of it 
still being done manually?  
Ms S Saunders :  No. All recruitment needs to come through the PALM IS recruitment system .  
Senator CASH:   So none of it's being done manually now; it's online?  
Ms S Saunders :  Yes. 
Senator CASH:   In terms of the IT system, is it the same IT system that is used as a reporting mechanism for 
the department?  
Ms S Saunders :  Yes. It's meant to be a ho listic system where we record all the worker -centric data. I'll pass  
over to Ms Row e in terms of the benefits  that are achieved by using th is new system in terms of the  amount of 
data et cetera  that we will be able to collect.  
Senator CASH:   On the data, yo u might be able to assist with this one as well. I have been advised that there 
are privacy concerns relating to the IT system and  that worker and employer information has been accessible by 
external users , including outside of Australia , obviously from people who should not have visibility of such 
personal data or business details , and that there is no way to ring  fence user access within a company  so that any 
employee granted access would have complete visibility across the company's data. Are you aware of that?  
Ms Rowe :  We did receive some complaints around people overseas accessing data . When we've looked into 
each of those, we've not found any substance to those particular complaints.  
Senator CASH:   You have looked into them , then. So you have not seen any privacy breaches of personal and 
commercially confident information?  
Ms Rowe :  That's correct.  
Senator CASH:   Okay.  
Ms Rowe :  Picking up on your earlier point, part of the reason for moving to this platform  was that it  provides 
greater protection s for the sensitive data that we collect in the program as well. That was one of the reasons for 
moving to this , as well as having a unified system . As Mr Stott said , we had two separate systems. One was a 
manual processing system . That manual  processing system  was not going to be sustainable when we  were  
exceeding 38,000 workers. We were having emails and paper versions of recruitment plans and things being 
emailed through , so there was every opportunity for worker details to be missed,  data entry errors, data to go 
missing and , of course, security and privacy concerns. The system actually addresses some of those issues that 
you're raising,  Senator.  
Senator CASH:   In terms of the guidelines  and if there 's an overlap with Senator Davey's questions, feel free 
to tell me that  you went through the feedback from stakeholders about the ability for employers to implement 
the deed and guidelines. We've been advised that several industry groups have written to Minister Burke advising 
the minister that the program cannot be implemented. Are you aware of  that correspondence?  
Mr Stott :  Yes. I think it's the constructions, broadly, from memory, Ms D avey seems to recall strongly.  
Senator CASH:   Could  you take me through that?  
Ms Duffy :  I'm a ware of the correspondence.  
Senator CASH:   You're aware of the correspondence? Okay. I think you went through with Ms Davey what 
the department has been doing to assist employers to implement the new requirements. Is the department 
producing the frequently asked questions to further clarify requirements in the legally binding documents between 
employers and the government? Are they being produced?  
Mr Stott :  Yes. In fact , to cover off two domains , with respect to the information that Ms Sa unders was giving 
on the PALM IS system, there 's a series of frequently asked questions , webinars and guides  and a range of 
artefacts and collateral  as well as individualised outbound assistance for those folks using that system , and 
similarly so for the guidelines . The guidelines themselves , in fact , sit beside the deed to assist with 
implementation. We do have a particular trade -off, I suppose, with two e qually desirable but  sometimes  
incompatible outcomes. If we build comprehensive guidelines , we stymie the innovation from individuals to offer 
assistance. If we don't give some guidelines or principles, then folks are at risk of inadvertent noncompliance.  
Senator CASH:   Understood. So they just need to go online , and they can see those guidelines and the 
frequently asked  questions with the answers ? 
Ms Duffy :  That's correct.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 88 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Stott :  There  are a lot of collateral fact sheets. The deed and  guidelines are openly published . They're an 
open source on the website. They can be accessed by many folks. Ms Duffy is preparing , as we reference d just a 
few moments ago , to give additional assistance to some  folks and take on more feedback about  whether use of 
particular constructions or changing descriptions in the guidelines could both enhance the usability of those 
guidelines and enhance the innovation from those folks who want to do really, really well. We don't want to stop 
them.  
CHAIR:   Senator Cash   
Senator CASH:   I have o ne more question . I've been advised that the department ha s reached separate 
agreements with some large employers that enable them to operate outside the deed guidelines. Is that correct?  
Mr Stott :  I don't think so, no.  
Ms Duffy :  There are two employers who asked for more time to reach the pay parity requirement,  because of 
the size and scale and the number of host employers that they operate with. So two employers  have been given 
additional time.  There is a back-pay provision so  that the workers won't be disadvantaged.  
Senator CASH:   Thank you, Chair.  
CHAIR:   Thanks very much. Senator Grogan?  
Senator GROGAN:   I'll be quick. I do  want to talk a  little bit more about the PALM Scheme  before you 
scoot away!  I just want to be really clear : since the changes , you've seen the numbers , in terms of employers and 
people signing up for the scheme , go up ? 
Mr Stott :  Yes, 93 per cent of the existing approved  employer cohort  when we commenced implementing the 
new deed and guidelines  that's 390 -odd of the 424 approved employers when we issued the deed  signed on. 
Then additional approved employers entered the scheme, taking on the new deed. At the finalisation of offering 
the new deed to the existing cohort, we 'd closed out with 452 approved employers. Notable in that is that all of 
those approved employers who were active  that is, they were approved and had workers in country under the 
predecessor SWP, Seasonal Worker Program , and Pacific Labour Scheme deeds  were entered and signed on to 
the new deed. That 's continuing on a little bit, but we  wouldn't say that we're still rolling out the new deed ; it is 
the deed  now. 
Senator GROGAN:   I'm also reading the National Farmers Federation press release  that Senator Davey 
brought to our attention , which calls the PALM scheme 'rudderless ' and say s it is expected that 'growers are 
readying themselves to walk away in big numbers '. But that doesn't seem to be what has actually happened.  
Mr Stott :  No; there are now more approved employers in the scheme th an there were when we commenced 
offering the new deed.  Of those who were in that initial cohort , seven , I think it's fair to say,  we didn't hear from 
at all   
Ms Duffy :  Yes, that's right. We withdrew the offer.  
Senator GROGAN:   Sorry?  
Ms Duffy :  For seven employers , we withdrew the offer because we didn't hear back from them. They were 
employers that weren't active and probably hadn't recruited in either scheme before.  
Senator GROGAN:   It could well be that  as Senator Davey , I think,  said for those employers who can't 
guarantee work for employe es, they probably are better off to utilise a backpacker workforce.  
Mr Stott :  In that instance, those employers were not active in the scheme , but t hey were approved   
Senator GROGAN:   They hadn't had workers?  
Mr Stott :  They weren't actively recruiting   
Senator GROGAN:   So you haven't had anybody leave the scheme? You've had n o employer leave the 
scheme ? 
Mr Stott :  About  20 wrote  had decided that they wouldn't   
Ms Duffy :  Twenty -two declined the deed, and some of those had had some workers, but they weren't active at 
the time  that they declined the offer of the deed. So some , in the past , had had small numbers of workers. Some 
were no longer in that business  or had sold the business or were selling the business. Because we had two 
previous deeds  the short -term or seasonal workers deed , and the Pacific labour scheme deed some had both 
deeds , or deeds with different entities within the business, and, obviously, they only signed one  PALM deed . So 
there 's a little bit of overlap in those numbers.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 89 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator GROGAN:   But, as to the change, it was nothing radical, in terms of the numbers, other than what 
seems like a decent increase?  
Ms Duffy :  That's right. We were preparing contingencies, in case there were larger numbers where we needed 
to redeploy workers. That wasn't the case. We redeployed a small number of workers  seven, in fact  as a result 
of the deed changes . So it was a very small proportion.  
Senator GROGAN:   I note that the National Farmers Federation were saying that the scheme was not going to 
achieve its ends and all the growers were going to run away from it. That was in June. You 're talking about 
numbers in August, did you say?  
Ms Duffy :  Our end of September or 1 October numbers   
Senator GROGAN:   Okay  September -October.  
Ms Duffy :  are the numbers Mr Stott referred to, with the 452 approved employers, which is the largest 
number of approved employers. It has increased from when we offered the deeds in late June.  
Senator GROGAN:   Then, as late as August, we had the shadow minister for international development and 
the Pacific saying that stakeholders were walking away from the scheme as well. Was there any indication? It 
seems curious. Obviously, Senator Davey's raised it  that there is a notion or a sense that people are going to 
walk away from the scheme in large numbers.  
Mr Stott :  We saw the publicity. We received correspondence to that effect. The information that's available to 
the department is that there are now more approved employers than there have ever been , that 93 per cent of the 
existing approved employer cohort signed on to the new deed and then additional employers signed on , and that 
the recruitments for the scheme for the next month from here are double the monthly average and the record 
number of recruitments requested. So the information available to the department  would indicate that there 's a 
strong cohort of approved employers who are engaging with the scheme.  
Senator GROGAN:   Well, it's very reassuring to see that the Farmers Federation and the shadow minister for 
international development and the Pacific were incorrect in their predictions. And congratulations on the work 
you've done.  
CHAIR:   I just want to ask a couple of questions on the same subject before I go to Senator Rice. Did any of 
the partner countries in the Pacific or did Timor -Leste recommend improvement to the conditions of their people 
working in Australia?  
Mr Stott :  We conducted intensive consultation with representatives of their capitals . Staff of the various 
labour -sending units from participating countries came; we brought them , together with their heads of mission.  
They made clear to us the impact of the scheme, positive and negative , in their countries , and,  as we consulted 
with them on both the proposals that were being consulted upon and ways we might implement those, supported 
many of what would eventually become scheme settings , in particular minimum hours and safety net provisions 
they thought would assist with reducing experiences , including disengagement. That work was led by Ms Duffy , 
who might have more to offer .  
Ms Duffy :  I'm happy to talk about the specific settings , but broadly   
CHAIR:   I'm fine u nless you have anything specific  to add. Minister, I was involved in chairing  an inquiry into 
job security , and there were a number of  extension s with the approval of the Senate . There was a particular 
extension because of horrendous allegations involving both the PALM scheme and other schemes that involv e 
seasonal workers . I recall one particular instance, and there are many , where workers were dumpster diving to get 
food, to be able to feed themselves during  the week. They were on seasonal worker arrangements. There were 
horrific examples of people not getting any work  your point earlier  and trying to survive literally with no pay, 
or a group of people trying to live off a loaf of bread and some scraps  that were given to them . These stories were 
far from  reflective o f every  farm, but they showed  gross exploitation to the extent that on 2 February 2022 
Senator Canavan , who was on the inquiry  with me,  in an article by Angus Thompson in the Sydney Morning 
Herald  'likened  his own government 's controversial  Pacific Island seasonal worker program  to indentured labour  
and a cartel , with visa holders unable to easily switch jobs in an environment that was ripe for abuse '. The 
evidence we received during that inquiry was horrific , and I think Senator Canavan expressed a view that many 
held. One Samoan  worker gave evidence , and we extended the inquiry because of allegations of there being 
actions taken against those workers because they gave evidence to the committee , and that was subsequently dealt 
with.  
We need to  try to rectify what is a good scheme in essence and a scheme that is appropriately handled by 
many, many farmers  because some workers find themselves in  situation s where we have no work and no pay , Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 90 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  where people are actually starving, where they have 60 hours of work  and very little pay . We heard  during the 
inquiry that some received  pay of only $100, so effectively in that situation they would be starving on no pay and 
in another situation they were  getting $60 for 100 hours worth of work , so starvation pay. The idea is to rectify 
that sort of anomaly that happens with a small minority of farmers. Is that what the aim of these rectifications are, 
to get the good farmers and make sure that all farmers have a fair playing field for how they deal with human 
beings from our Pacific neighbours?  
Senator Watt:   Yes, that 's it in essence. You're  right  and I've said this before  that the sort of exploitation 
and abuse that you've mentioned and that we have seen isn't representative of what happens overall in the scheme . 
But it happens enough for, I think, government to take action. As I said, I was personally involved in a lot of 
meetings with the farm sector about this ; my office was, I know Minister B urke's  office was , and I'm pretty sure 
he had some discussions . There were changes made along the way through the process to recognise some of the 
feedback we got from the farm sector. The final outcome wasn't the same as what was originally proposed in 
every way . But we do need to take action to protect those workers, to protect the integrity of the PALM scheme  
and to protect those relationships with the Pacific, while at the same time making sure that we deliver the workers 
that farmers , meat processes and many others need, and to make sure that employers who are doing  the right thing 
aren't being  undercut by the ones who aren't.  
CHAIR:   Thank you. Senator Rice.  
Senator RICE:   Minister, I asked you a question in question time last week about mutual obligations.  
Senator Watt:   Yes, I remember that.  
Senator RICE:   You answered  that those in receipt of public support benefits  should have some  obligation on 
them , but you don't think it should be punitive. The Punishment for profit  report  found that 40 per cent of 
respondents said they had experienced  bullying or abuse of power from their provider  and 93 per cent of 
respondents said that mutual  obligations had harmed their physical or mental health . We 've just heard evidence 
that 70 per cent of people with Workforce Australia providers have had their payments suspended , and the most 
that they will get in response , even if outrageous things have been done to them , is an apology. Can you explain to 
me how mutual obligations do not punish people?  
Senator Watt:   In the end it comes down to how they are designed. As I said to you, the government on the 
whole supports mutual obligations , and we think the community does expect that those in receipt of public 
support have a responsibility to seek work. But w e have very strong objections to the way the mutual obligation 
scheme that currently exists is designed. We think it is punitive , we think it  is degrading  and we think it isn't 
about assisting people into work.  
Senator RICE:   Is that how it's currently being  operated under your government's watch?  
Senator Watt:   That is the system that we inherited and that  is the system that is being reviewed through th e 
committee that Julian Hill is chairing. There have been some pretty  clear signals from the government that we 
intend that to change, but we need to do it in a considered way , and that's what that inquiry is doing. We support 
the concept of mutual obligation, but we want it to be about assisting people to find work , rather than it having 
punitive, degrading, one-size-fits-all compliance activities .  
Senator RICE:   Is there anything more that you can do right now, in the light of the evidence we have 
received about the people with Work force Australia providers, where 70 per cent of people had their payments 
suspended. Is n't there action you could take to stop the system from harming people right now?  
Senator Watt:   We want that to be done in a considered way , based on the recommendations that are received 
from that inquiry , so we get it right. We don't want to have a knee -jerk reaction that we then have to amend in 
three months time. We want to get it right from the beginning , and w e want to get it done as quickly as we can.  
Senator RICE:   I want to move on to Work for the Dole . During the inquiry into Work force Australia, there 
has been mention that employment providers have been advised by lawyers not to send income support recipients 
to Work for the Dole sites because of the occupational health and safety risk. Has the department heard evidence 
from job providers  about legal advice not to send people to Work for the Dole sites ?  
Ms M Ryan :  I'm not aware of said advice or information . Referrals to Work for the Dole are occurring,  so if 
you've got further information about that   
Senator RICE:   Julian Hill, the chair of the inquiry , recently  stated that had job providers are sitting on legal 
advice not to send people to Work for the Dole  for OH & S reasons . Have you not  heard of that?  
Ms M Ryan :  We see participants being referred to Work for the Dole now, and providers are obliged to 
conduct work health and safety risk assessments and so forth . That advice hasn't been shared with me , so no .  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 91 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator RICE:   Have you received any legal advice yourself on the OH & S risks associated with Work for 
the Dole ?  
Ms Lauman:   No. We require that providers undertake a workplace health and safety assessment  to ensure that 
it's safe . As each activity happens , people would make an assessment of a particular activity.  
Senator RICE:   Do you know whether the Workforce Australia providers have received legal advice , given 
that evidence?  
Ms M Ryan :  I'm not aware of that.  
Senator RICE:   Would you follow it up with them?  
Ms M Ryan :  We can follow that up. We have discussions with the peaks on a regular basis , and they have not 
disclosed or shared that with us , and nor has the department sought legal advice in relation to Work for the Dole . 
We do as a matter of course, and we're developing new guidelines and things like that , but nothing of recent note.  
Senator RICE:   Can you provide on notice the latest data on incidents, risk assessments , injuries and 
complaints from Work for the Dole sites?  
Ms M Ryan :  Sure. I do have it in my folder, but I'll take it on notice if you like.  
Senator RICE:   If you've got it there, could you please  provide it?  
Ms M Ryan :  In terms of work health and safety incidents, yes. I f I can just find the right page, I'll be able to 
help you with that. As I say that, I can't put my hand on it, so it may be best if I do take it on notice.  
Senator RICE:   You can take it on notice, given the time. In fact, what I also wanted  you to take on notice 
was, going back to mutual obligations, the percentage of people  that have been successfully employed  not just 
have exited the system  but have been successfully employed as a result of their mutual obligations . 
Ms M Ryan :  Okay. Actually, I can answer the question about the number of incidents; I've just found the 
paragraph. Apologies. From 1 July 2022 to 30 September this year, there have been a total of 78 incidents relating 
to 8,331 unique participants in relation to work health and safety matters. They involve d injuries such as fractures, 
strains to muscles, sprains, scratches, cuts, sunburns and so forth, but no incidents that would be deemed to be 
major serious incidents , but we would take that very   
Senator RICE:   Have you got a more granular breakdown of that data?  
Ms M Ryan :  I can provide that, yes.  
Senator RICE:   Thank you.  
Dr O'Rance :  We can give you some data on employment outcomes, rather than having to wait for that, if you 
like. 
CHAIR:   Senator Rice, you only have a few minutes before I have to rotate the call to Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator RICE:   This is my final question , so it'll be  my final answer.  
Dr O'Rance :  For Workforce Australia services, up until 30 September this year, we've had 244,955 job 
placements recorded for participants in that service. I'll give you the 26 -week outcomes, and I can do others as 
well if you like. We've had 60,300 26 -week outcomes recorded so far. That's where placement has lasted for at 
least 26 weeks and the participant has reduced their income support by at least 60 per cent, noting that the 
program has been running for 15 months.  
Senator RICE:   So there have been  a quarter of a million or thereabouts job placements overall, of which 
63,000, so only a quarter   
Dr O'Rance :  Many of those job placements occurred less than 26 weeks ago, so they haven't had time yet to 
become a 26 -week outcome.  
Senator RICE:   How does that compare with the number of participants? We had the number of participants 
before, didn't we?  
Dr O'Rance :  Let me take on notice the  in fact, I can give you the outcome rates.  
Senator RICE:   It was 500,000 or something . You  had 408,000 Wor kforce Australia face-to-face participants 
and 111,000 or 112,000 online  participants . 
Dr O'Rance :  I'll give you the outcome rates. The outcome rates are of everybody who has been around long 
enough to have potentially achieved an outcome. The 26 -week outcome rate as at 30 September is 12.0 per cent. 
That's of people who had commenced at least 26 weeks ago. That's going to continue to go up. In the first couple 
of years of a program, that rises before it reaches a plateau point.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 92 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator RICE:   So 12 per cent   
Dr O'Rance :  So far, yes.  
Senator RICE:   of people have  kept a job for more than six months.  
Dr O'Rance :  Yes. That's for Workforce Australia services . 
Senator RICE:   Thank you.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan. This will take us over a little bit over the quarter to , so maybe we'll move it  if 
you need a full 10 minutes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I realise I'm standing between you and dinner, as well as the dismissal of the 
department, so we'll get through our questions very quickly. I'd like to have a chat about ParentsNext. Following 
on from the discussion that Senator Rice was having in relation to mutual obligations, noting that mutual 
obligations are now voluntary for participants in ParentsNext, how will individuals and providers of employment 
services be supported to secure positive education outcomes and increase workforce participation in an 
environment where mutual obligations are now voluntary?  
Ms James :  I might just respond to that at a high level. We've got a current program in place, ParentsNext , 
where mutual obligations ceased  at 5 May, and that program is in operation.  We can talk to what's happening with 
that program . At the same time , we are consulting on a new program that will replace it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, I'll come to that.  
Ms James :  Are you interested in what's going on now with the current program ? 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, I will come to how you're going with designing the new one.  
Ms James :  We can share with you some data and feedback  from providers  about the current case load. I will 
hand over  to Sam for that.  
Ms Robertson :  As you aware , on 5 May this year, the Australian government announced that it will abolish 
ParentsNext from 30 June 2024. So , since 30 April this year to 30 September 2023, the case load has reduced 
from 96,764 participants to 88,580 participants. Not all of those are actively participating in the program, 
however . We've got roughly 58,000 participants . That's women and men.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That are active?  
Ms Robertson :  That are actively participating in the program at the current time.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   How many were active before the decision to suspend mutual obligations?  
Ms Robertson :  The entire case load had a requirement at that particular point in time   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So they were all active?  
Ms Robertson :  If they weren't exempt  that's right.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What do you think this means for parents that are involved in the program now, 
particularly those that have withdrawn, in terms of them moving further away from preparing for a job and , in the 
long term, connecting with the workplace to make sure they don't actually end up on an unemployment benefit?  
Ms Robertson :  Senator, I'd probably start by saying that ParentsNext is actually a pre -employment program , 
so there's  not actually a requirement on participants to get a job.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   No. 
Ms Robertson :  It's really about preparing them for when the ir youngest child   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But once their child's of school  age  
Ms Robertson :  starts school.  That's right.  In terms of what providers have been d oing,  they've been 
supporting participants on their case load , and we have actually seen an increase in use of the Participation Fund 
to look at how those supports can be flexed to actually get people in the door and participating in the program.  
In terms of people who are not actively participating in the program, I would say there 's probably a cohort 
where maybe we didn't have the eligibility quite correct  so those people have actually already got plans in place 
around what they're going to do when the youngest child starts school  and then there  are others where we  don't 
know why they're no longer participating. My colleague Ms Phillips , though,  has been undertaking some quite 
extensive consultations with participants, with parents , and she may be able to give you some further insights into 
what parents are telling her.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If you can very quickly, because I've got a lot more questions to go  but, please, Ms 
Phillips.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 93 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Phillips :  Very broadly, w hat we 've heard from parents in our consultations goes to the need for parents to 
really be recognised for their role as a parent first and foremost,  and the need for flexibility to achieve and work 
towards their goals when they are ready and able. We heard a lot about the challenges they face  and the need to 
prioritise parents who require the support. We heard a  lot about how the service should be delivered in terms of 
the quality of service and the staff , and also a lot about the location base d considerations and flexibility in how 
they might choose to participate and engage in the service.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. Is this the feedback that you 're getting through the consultations? I think  I 
asked a question about this at the last estimates  because the consultations on the new program were  happening 
between July and September. Is that right?  
Ms Phillips :  Correct.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Were you referring to the feedback you received through that?  
Ms Phillips :  That's correct.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In relation to those consultations, can you please take on notice to come back to me 
with the list of all meetings held, attendees and the main trends in discussion . Of course, withhold the name s of 
individuals if they require that from  a privacy point of view.  
Ms Lauman:   There is also a website that's been established around the consultations , to provide a level of 
transparency around conversations that people are having,  and the written submissions that have been provided 
have been published as well. We can provide the links to those.  
Ms James :  On that website, quite recently published, is a document summarising the themes of the 
consultations. I'm happy to table this if  you're happy to have my scribbles,  or you can go to the website.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We can get it off the website. Thank you. I'm sure your scribbles   
Ms James :  My highlighting.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   are very artistic.  
Of course I'm not going to ask for your judgement on this particular policy. At the Labor national conference 
there was a motion passed that said:  
Labor recognises that the current system does not adequately meet these goals,   
it's in relation to employment services more generally, not just ParentsNext   
and Labor is therefore committed to reforming the system, including through:  
  an enhanced role for the public sector in coordination and service delivery, including assessment, digital services, case 
management, research and quality assurance ; and 
  assisting local community specialist not -for-profit entities to contribute to the Commonwealth system.  
My question is: has the department had any discussions with the minister in relation to what an enhanced role for 
the public sector would look like?  
Ms Lauman:   One of the principles that was articulated in the employment white paper goes to a role for APS 
stewardship in those forward reforms. It talks about  ensuring greater APS involvement and investment in systems 
and programs to see that individuals are not left behind. In the course of developing those principles, the notion of 
the role of an APS,  versus the role of an external , provider has been looked at, but there haven't been concrete 
conversations around what that particularly looks like for forward  programs, pending the outcome of the select 
committee inquiry . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   My question was: has the department had any discussions with the minister in 
relation to what an enhanced role for the public sector might be? The extreme of that  could be taken as  going back 
to the old CES days  that the Commonwealth would deliver employment services  or anything from there , at 
that end, all the way through to the point you were just making.  
Ms James :  I think, in relation to the forthcoming parliamentary committee report, that will be received and 
considered at that time. As to the  extent to which it goes to this issue, we'll  advise on it at that time.  
There have been some other areas of our current operations where we've been changing the mix of who is 
delivering services, and they are  largely in response to certain events. For example, the employment facilitators 
working on the net  zero program in the net zero impacted regions are directly engaged public servants. We've  
made some changes to the deployment of employment services in Broome as a result of that provider not being 
able to continue. The department played a role there. So there are some examples. I'm conscious of the time. We 
could provide more information on notice if you like. They are quite confined.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 94 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. I understand that. With regard to the  idea of local community specialist not -for-
profit entities , has the department been asked to put together a list of providers that would fit that category?  
Ms James :  I'm not sure where  is that coming from Mr Hill's speech?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's a motion that was passed at the national conference of the Labor Party.  
Ms James :  We have  not been asked to do anything specific in relation to that motion.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can I get an update on the time line you're working to with the commencement of 
the ParentsNext replacement program? When will the new design be released?  
Ms James :  I think that's a matter for government.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   At this stage, you 're just in the consultation . The  consultation is finished , though, 
right?  
Ms Phillips :  The consultation is iterative.  At the moment, as Ms James said, we have a document out 
summarising what we've heard from parents . That is open for comment  until 10 November , and we're actively 
looking at the feedback as we're receiving it , so it is still a n open  process.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   When do  the current contracts for ParentsNext conclude?  
Ms Robertson :  The current contracts conclude on 30 June 2024.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you  envisaging that you will might need to extend them , given that the new 
design hasn't   
Ms Robertson :  Again, that would be a matter for government.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   We could have a situation where  parents are left   
Ms Robertson :  I couldn't speculate at the current time.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Very quickly, I did ask  last time  about Workforce  Australia online. We had a 
discussion about how long people had been in the online system. Can I get a quick update on that? What 's the 
longest time a person has been in the online system now?  
Ms M Ryan :  The policy settings are such that a participant , if they're engaged in work or study , can stay in 
online for up to 18 months. If they 're not engaged in work, study or training, they exit after 12 months . I might 
just check with D r O'Rance on whether there's some other granularity there about that , because there may 
occasionally be some outliers. But that 's the standard. Eighteen  months is the maximum duration that a participant 
can continue in online services.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Right. But in last estimates  I think it was in March  Ms Ryan, you said that there 
were some people who were in  there for 24 months.  
Ms M Ryan :  Yes, and we've been cleaning that up. That was caught up with the transition to Workforce 
Australia , and we 've progressively been finalising that . There may  have been some  for whom,  under the previous  
new employment services trial, we didn't have a maximum time in service. I will take that on notice , if I may   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's fine.  
Ms M Ryan :  just to confirm what the current arrangements are.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   And in response to the question you did take on notice last time  it had a  number 
ending in 681  you indicated that there were still thousands of online participants that ha d been in online services 
for over 18 months . Have  all of those people transitioned now?  
Ms M Ryan :  We'll just see if we can have a look at that answer.  
Dr O'Rance :  That was QON  681 from last time, Senator?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Correct.  
Dr O'Rance :  I think we said at the time that there w ere 1, 006 participants  who had been in online for 24 
months plus . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   And what's the status of those?  
Dr O'Rance :  I don't have it on me  but I'm just chasing it up to see if we can get that for you . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I don't need the individual name or whatever.  
Ms M Ryan :  We'll get an update for you  in terms of   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, h ow many have exited.  
Ms M Ryan :  Yes. Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 95 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you inform the committee of how many online participants have found 
employment and how long , on average , it has taken these participants to find employment?  
Ms M Ryan :  Can we take that on notice ? In online services we don't track job outcomes per se. What we do is 
use by proxy the postprogram monitoring to see the reason why a participant has exited online services after six 
months. Is it due to moving onto a different payment ? Is it strongly linked to employment ? So, for  preciseness , I 
think I will take that on notice , to give you a better answer.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I will now move to the actual cost of delivering online services , and take it on notice, 
if you need to.  
Ms M Ryan :  I will take that on notice , if I may.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Include  staff costs , as well  as all those things involved in delivering it . My final 
question is : now that the online system has been in place  for I've been here for  almost 18 months ; is it that long,  
or is it longer?  
Ms M Ryan :  I beg your pardon, was that the online service?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Now that the online system has been in place for almost 18 months   
Ms M Ryan :  Under Workforce Australia  that's correct, yes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   That's the distinction. With  that experience now under your belt, does the department 
have a better understanding of which cohorts may be disadvantaged by being in an online system and really are 
better served by being face  to face with a provider? Are there some trends and insights  that you have ? 
Ms M Ryan :  We are actively looking at that to see whether the re are particular cohorts or particular attributes 
that will result in some participants perhaps exiting early  they are successful ; they can find their own pathway to 
employment. Then there are those who, with some other interventions, could stay in online or may need to be 
exited sooner. So we are actively looking at   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Triaging people.  
Ms M Ryan :  Yes. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are you getting better at doing that?  
Ms M Ryan :  We are still  working through that. I think the introduction of the four -month  activation 
requirement earlier this year has certainly identified some more participants who,  in discussions with them , we've 
identified would  probably be better placed with a provider , and we can see that they've exited for those reasons. 
We still have those safeguards  of the digital service reviews at four and eight months , and we are practically 
working with the case load to see what we can do,  then,  and whether  there are some other interventions there , 
particularly in regard to those who may not  be meeting their obligation requirements  and who, if we think  they're 
at risk of falling behind, we can talk to and maybe exit  to a provider. We don't want people in the system who are 
not progressing , so we are working through that.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   As we discussed  last time, my concern  is that people who are there  for any longer 
than they really sh ould be could fall and be entrenched in welfare.  
Dr O'Rance :  What we see, and what we're particularly looking at, is identifying cohorts of participants who , 
after several months in online , are not finding work or have indications of struggling with the system. We do have 
some groups of people who stay in online for longer times but are regularly engaged in work. There 's quite a big 
difference , obviously,  between somebody who 's  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. 
Dr O'Rance :  So w e can provide some information  on the cohorts of people who are at greatest risk of 
remaining in online but not having any engagement in  work.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Terrific.  
CHAIR:   Are you done?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes. 
CHAIR:   Thanks , everybody , for your patience. We will now go to a suspension. These witnesses  won't need 
to come back. We 'll have the Fair Work Ombudsman back  after the break . Thank you , Comcare,  for your 
patience . You also  are now excuse d. 
Proceedings suspended from 18:57  to 19:52  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 96 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Fair Work Ombudsman  
CHAIR:   I now welcome representatives from the Fair Work Ombudsman  including the Fair Work 
Ombudsman, of course, Ms Anna Booth. Congratulations, and you are coming to your first hearing.  
Ms Booth :  Indeed.  
CHAIR:   Is there any opening statement you'd like to make?  
Ms Booth :  Yes, I would like to make a brief opening statement, thank you. It is only just over seven weeks 
since I took up the role, and I want to say a few words about my background and what I'm hoping to achieve in 
the role. As you know, the Fair Work Ombudsman's function, arising from the Fair Work Act, is to promote 
harmonious, productive, cooperative and compliant workplaces. That of course is a function that sits within the 
context of an act that supports national economic prosperity and social inclusion. And that is something that 
drives me, has driven me, in my professional life, and also I take that into this role, and it's an important context.  
I began my career in the trade union movement. I started with the Clothing and Allied Trades Union and later 
the Amalgamated Textile, Clothing and Footwear Union. My focus was on addressing the exploitation of migrant 
women workers. That saw me joining the government body of the ACTU. That concluded in 1995, and I went on 
to roles in corporate Australia. I've been a board member of large companies and I have also been a third -party 
neutral mediator in my own small company. So, I've stood in the shoes of workers, as an advocate, in the trade 
union movement and I've stood in the shoes of employers, as a shareholder representative and a small -business 
owner myself. And of course I've had the opportunity  a rather unique and special opportunity  of being the Fair 
Work Commission deputy president, creating rights by making awards and approving enterprise agreements and 
facilitating enterprise bargaining. And now I've been given this very special opportunity to , if you like, work on 
the other side of the coin of the integrity of the workplace relations system and enforce the law.  
It's very early in my time as the Fair Work Ombudsman.  I have initially been focused on looking inwards, 
looking into the organisation, seeking to understand how all the moving parts fit together, and I'm only just 
beginning to meet external stakeholders and listen to their priorities. What has been so pleasing for me in the time 
that I've been in the organisation is that I've observed a group of people, who are with me today, who have the 
same drive to achieve the purpose that I've got, and that of course is to maintain workplace standards for 
Australian workers and to ensure a level playing field for compliant employers.  What I'm learning through my 
early consultations with the employer stakeholders is that that is a common purpose.  
There is a common purpose, I think, between the office of the Fair Work Ombudsman and the workplace 
community  workers, those  who represent them and employers. That purpose had been advanced by my 
predecessor, Sandra Parker, who is no doubt well known to you and whose achievements I wish to build on. It is 
important to me  and this was important in my role in the Fair Work Commission as well  that the organisation 
is seen to be  and is, indeed  an impartial regulator that applies the law as it stands. Whilst enforcement is 
essential to that, also what's important is to prevent workplace noncompliance in the first place, with the provision 
of information, with education and with early -stage resolution of issues, before it gets to the point of using 
enforcement tools.  
I'm very keen to see the workplace community act  and own its own responsibilities in this area. I do think, 
working collaboratively, we can achieve even more than the Fair Work Ombudsman has achieved to date, and I 
think that, by working in cooperation with the workplace community, we'll be more effective in upholding 
workplace standards for Australian workers and levelling the playing field for compliant employers. I am very 
much looking forward to your questions, not only at this Senate estimates but in estimates to come.  
CHAIR:   Thank you, Ms Booth, and welcome aboard. There is a wealth of experience you've brought to this 
role, and we're looking forward to seeing you at future estimates meetings. I'll now go to Senator Brockman.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I also extend a warm welcome. I am actually reasonably new to this committee as 
well, so we'll learn this area together. I realise you spelt out some of it here, but, if you had to name one or two 
key priorities as you start to develop more into the role, what would they be for the Fair Work Ombudsman?  
Ms Booth :  They would be taking  a direction  I don't have a specific concrete program or change in mind, but 
they would be taking a direction  of collaborating with the Fair Work Commission. It's a Fair Work family, and 
I'd like to see it around the dinner table together from time to time. It's also, as I said, about collaborating with the 
members of the workplace community. What form that takes I am yet really to crystallise. That will need 
conversations with the stakeholders as well as the internal staff of the office of the Fair Work Ombudsman, but I 
do think that there is a responsibility that lies at the heart of the workplace community, and I'd like to see us work 
collaboratively, both strategically and operationally.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 97 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BROCKMAN:   There will be a few questions here that you might either want to take on notice or 
perhaps Ms Volzke  may be able to help us with. Can you give us an update on how the Employer Advisory 
Service is going?  
Ms Booth :  I can say that it's going very well and I can say that I  have observed our staff on the phones, 
speaking with employers, listening to their particular circumstances , and then I've actually observed them typing 
up the advice that they do. For more than that, in terms of the full program, I would turn to another member of my 
team, and it probably wouldn't be Ms Volzke on this occasion. I think I  would turn to Ms Lewis.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I would like to get some idea of the work flow, how many businesses per week 
would contact it and how many businesses over, say, the last 12 months. Is that a reasonable time frame?  
Ms Booth :  I'll just let Ms Lewis get settled, and I'm sure she will do her best to assist you.   
Ms Lewis :  As Ms Booth has just said, the demand has been fantastic for the service. In fact, it's doubled in the 
most recent financial year, 2022 -23, compared to 2021 -22. We had 3 ,311 incoming inquiries last financial year.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   That's double from the previous financial year?  
Ms Lewis :  That was double the previous year  of 1,653. So in total   
Senator BROCKMAN:   What's the  sorry. I'm going to ask you what the driver of that is, but keep going.  
Ms Lewis :  In total, we've had 4,875 pieces of written advice as at 10 September , so it has  surpassed the 
original anticipated demand.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Would you track how many businesses that covers?  
Ms Lewis :  At the moment, I think that essentially reflects small businesses. The majority would be   
Senator BROCKMAN:   Individual businesses?  
Ms Lewis :  Fewer than five employees. They 're micro small businesses.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Would that number,  4,875 pieces of advice   
Ms Lewis :  Written advice.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   be representative of approximately that number of businesses?  
Ms Lewis :  Approximately that number of small businesses, yes.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So it is generally one small business asking for one piece of advice.  
Ms Lewis :  Yes. Occasionally, they'll come back for a follow -up advice, as you would expect. About eight per 
cent of the small businesses are those who haven't yet even employed the ir first staff member. So they are looking 
to employ , and they're relying on the service to assist them with , particularly, coverage and classification s. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   So that is the key driver : inexperience in employing staff ? Would that be fair to say? 
Are there any other drivers that you've picked up?  
Ms Lewis :  I wouldn't say that. What I would say is they are yet to employ their first staff, so it may be that 
they haven't had experience in this industry previously or they  are wanting to ensure that they're  compliant, to 
confirm that , to satisfy themselves.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Do you get any feedback about why they've decided to approach you? Is it that 
they've found the system too complex to get their own heads around it? Have they generally tried to get their 
heads around it? Do you get any feedback of that sort?  
Ms Lewis :  I would point to my colleague, Ms Hannah, who is responsible for our education and 
communications. We've got comprehensive support for small business. It's one of our priority sectors, so we have 
extensive engagement with the sector. We've got our own small business showcase. That's a commonly used 
pathway for small business, so I would say that would be how they know to come to us.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   When does the organisation's funding for the service end?  
Ms Lewis :  30 June next year.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   30 June 2024?  
Ms Lewis :  2024.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Have you had any communication yet with the government about the continuation of 
that funding?  
Ms Lewis :  We're often in contact with the government in discussing that.  
Ms Booth :  I might ask Mr Campbell whether he's got any information on that.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 98 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Campbell :  The question is about the EAS. Its ongoing funding , as Ms Lewis has pointed out, does 
terminate in 30 June this year. That information was also shared with the department , who obviously are well 
aware . As part of our ongoing conversations with them about not only policy implementation but also changes to 
our work practices going forward, we've had discussions about the fact that that 's a service that will conclude if 
funding isn't otherwise provided.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   How many times has the advice guarantee provision of the Fair Work Ombudsman 
been utilised?  
Mr Campbell :  Are you talking about the YCROOA  reference?  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Sorry?  
Mr Campbell :  Our underlying guarantee to the community and people who contact us is that, assuming they 
have given us all the right information about their circumstances, they can rely on our advice, and we wouldn't 
take enforcement action if they relied on that advice.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Yes. How many times has that guarantee been activated?  
Mr Campbell :  'Very rarely' would be my answer. It underpins   
Senator BROCKMAN:   But it has been?  
Mr Campbell :  In some instances we have provided an incorrect advice, employers have brought that to our 
attention, and we've looked into that and identified that they are correct  that, based on the information, we could 
have provided a different piece of guidance on, say, an award classification. As a result of that  advice  the 
employer may have underpaid an individual, and they will make good that payment, and we wouldn't prosecute 
them for making good that underpayment, for example.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Is there an acceptance of legal liability by the Fair Work Ombudsman in those 
circumstances? How does it actually work in practice?  
Mr Campbell :  I'm not sure about acceptance of legal liability. What we know is that we have an obligation to 
get our advice right, which we do hundreds of thousands of times a year for many, many employers. On the very 
odd occasion that we've gotten it wrong, we take responsibility for that.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Yes, but I'm wondering what that looks like in practice, particularly if a dispute 
escalates. Obviously, you agree not to take any action against the individual small business involved, but what if 
the dispute escalated to a point where it reached the courts? Would  that guarantee   
Mr Campbell :  It hasn't got to that. That would   
Senator BROCKMAN:   I accept that it hasn't got to that, but have you considered what would happen if it did 
get to that point ? Does  that guarantee extend beyond your ability to say, 'Okay , we're not going to fine you ; we 
accept we gave you some misleading advice.'  What if the dispute escalated? Does that protection extend any 
further?  
Ms Booth :  We might ask Ms Volzke to address that, because it is essentially a legal question that you're 
asking.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Absolutely.  
Ms Volzke :  As you would know, we as the Fair Work Ombudsman are not the only bod y who can commence 
proceedings, for example , in relation to an underpayment. It would be possible , for example,  for an underpaid 
employee or a union on their behalf to also commence proceedings, but certainly from our perspective we 
wouldn't be seeking a penalty in circumstances where that employer relied on the advice that we ha d provided.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   But the shield can't go, effectively, beyond you imposing a penalty.  
Ms Volzke :  Correct, in the same way that we can't issue binding determinations because we are not the only 
body that can bring claims in relation to, as I said as an example, underpayments . That's right.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I accept that it hasn't come up yet, but in those circumstances would it be within your 
powers to , effectively , go into bat for the small business involved in another forum  to say, 'They were  relying on 
our advice'?  
Ms Volzke :  In the context of any proceedings that might arise  obviously, we're talking about 
hypotheticals  I would have thought that that advice would be led in evidence as to what they had relied on. I 
think they would be, effectively, using it as a defence in those circumstances.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 99 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BROCKMAN:   I accept that the small business would use it in defence. I'm really trying hard not to 
put a hypothetical in front of you . It is a clear prospective situation . I'm just wondering if it is covered anywhere 
in your authorising act that you could , effectively , join with the party to help in their defence.  
Ms Volzke :  Our functions are set out in section 682. I'm not sure they would specifically contemplate that. I'd 
like to take that on notice and consider it. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   I'm happy to move on. In relation to the review of the FWO  and this might be 
before your time  was the organisation asked for input into the terms of reference? I am seeing  some nods.  
Ms Booth :  The preparation of the terms of reference was certainly before my time, but I can confirm we've 
been asked for input in the conduct of the review. Would anyone else like to comment on the terms of reference  
preparation ? 
Mr Campbell :  Yes, we were given an opportunity to provide feedback on the terms of reference to the 
department, but they are the department's terms of reference.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Are you aware of any other stakeholders who were invited to contribute?  
Mr Campbell :  No. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms Booth, have you met with CFMEU national secretary Mr Zac h Smith?  
Ms Booth :  Yes, I have , in the course of my early stakeholder consultations.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So you discussed the changes to the Fair Work Ombudsman with Mr Smith?  
Ms Booth :  I've discussed me becoming the Fair Work Ombudsman, but it was very much a meet -and-greet 
conversation, so I did not have detailed conversations about  the operations of the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Do you share Mr Smith's view  when, talking about the Fair Work Ombudsman, he 
said: 
  as I said before, we don't want it tweaked, we want it abolished and  replaced with a watchdog that actually prioritises 
workers.  The Fair Work Ombudsman has proven itself unable  to deal with many issues affecting workers like wage theft, 
sham contracting and corporate insolvencies.  
Ms Booth :  As I said in my opening statement, not only do I regard the organisation as an important institution 
in the workplace relations family  but I'm actually in awe of the dedication and commitment that I observe, not just 
amongst the leadership of the organisation but amongst the front -line. I have spent my early days trying to 
understand all of the moving parts , as I said . My way of doing of that isn't only to be briefed but to go and sit on 
the info line and listen to calls coming in. It is to observe, as I said, employer advice being typed on the screen so 
I could see how that took shape. It is to visit with inspectors and have them describe their work in the field to me . 
I wouldn't have applied for the job as I did if I hadn't got that respect , which has only been enhanced by my time 
at the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Ms Volzke :  Can I add a couple of things to Ms Booth's response. The Fair Work Ombudsman doesn't have a 
role, really , in corporate insolvencies. We have commenced 10 litigations in building and construction industry 
for wage underpayments. All those litigations relate to failure to comply with a compliance notice that relates to 
underpayment of wages and other entitlements. I can also confirm that we have a number of active sham 
investigations as well , including not only in the building and construction industry but in other industries as well.  
Ms Booth :  If I might add, as well as meeting with Mr Smith, I've also met with the Master Builders 
Association and it is my practi ce when I meet with stakeholders, as far as logistically possible, to always meet 
with both the union and employer representatives. I hope in the future they will be sitting in the same room with 
me whilst I meet with them.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Just really quickly because this finishes this line of questions at least , has the 
CFMEU reached out to work on those issues that you just talked about? Are any of those references from the 
CFMEU ? 
Ms Volzke :  I think that's forward -facing work which Ms Booth will be driving, so, no, it certainly hasn't   
Senator BROCKMAN:   So the answer is no?  
Ms Volzke :  Certainly , from my perspective, no, I haven't had reach -outs in relation to those.  
Senator FARUQI:   A warm welcome from me as well, Ms Booth.  
Ms Booth :  Thank you. That is very kind.  
Senator FARUQI:   I just have some questions on the excellent work that your office has been doing in the 
university sector. I understand, from your annual report that was published this week, that in 20 22-23 your office Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 100 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  recovered more than $96 million in unpaid and stolen wages for 26,526 employees in the university sector. Now, 
as you know, over the last few years, more and more has been exposed about wage theft in the university sector . It 
is now seen to be pretty systemic.  Do you  think the numbers reported in this year's report represent an accurate 
picture of wages stolen , or do you think this is just the tip of the iceberg, given your knowledge and experience ? 
Ms Booth :  It is not possible for me , and it may not even be possible for the Office of the Fair Work 
Ombudsman , at this point to know whether the amount that has been recovered to date is the tip of the iceberg but 
I would certainly expect that we don't have a complete picture yet. There is still quite a large number of 
investigations that are underway in the university sector . I perhaps would ask Ms Volzke , who has responsibility 
for this area in the organisation , to say more about that.  
Ms Volzke :  I think you are asking us to express an opinion, which I can't do. What I can tell you, though, is 
that we have 27 universities who have made some sort of contact with us . We have at the moment 23 active 
matters with 10 of those in the public domain.  
Senator FARUQI:   So there are 23 active matters ? Because I remember asking the former Fair Work 
Ombudsman Mrs Parker in May 2023 and she said that  the office had had an engagement with 27 universities . Is 
that number still the same after five months? Are there still 27 universities?  
Ms Volzke :  Universities can be on the list and   
Senator FARUQI:   Of course.  
Ms Volzke :  I can confirm this year we have had five new self -reports come in.  
Senator FARUQI:   So five new self -reports ? 
Ms Volzke :  Yes. 
Senator FARUQI:   And then she said 23 active matters, because in May 2023, nine universities were under 
investigation and that , for four other universities, investigations had completed. So that means, in the last five 
months, there are 14 new active matters?  
Ms K Anderson :  I have overarching responsibility for the universit y strategy work. I think the number, the 
nine you are just referring to, wasn't in fact the open number of active investigations but rather the number that 
were in the public domain , so I think that nine becomes 10 . There are  now 10 that are in the public domain . We 
have 23 that are open active investigations, leaving obviously 13 . 
Senator FARUQI:   Could you tell me what was the number of active investigations in May?  
Ms K Anderson :  I would have to take that on notice and cross -check that for you.  
Senator FARUQI:   So you are saying 10 in the public domain and 13 others  for 2023 ? 
Ms K Anderson :  That is correct.  
Senator FARUQI:   And there are 41 universities altogether?  
Ms K Anderson :  When Ms Parker , in her role as ombudsman , wrote to the university sector, I think she wrote 
to 42 institutions, so that is the cohort we are considering.  
Senator FARUQI:   So could you give me a number overall. You could take this on notice if you don't have it. 
From the time you started these investigations, how many have been investigated overall?  
Ms K Anderson :  I will take that on notice. Obviously, there will be a number that end up in the public 
domain either because they announced that they are under investigation or because we have a compliance 
outcome that we then make public. There will be some that are closed without a compliance order.  
Senator FARUQI:   That is right. I just want the number that are closed and you can name the others, if that is 
alright.  
Ms K Anderson :  Yes, absolutely.  
Senator FARUQI:   I know that in September, Ms Booth, your office  alleged that University of NSW breached 
the Fair Work Act between 2017 and 2022 by failing to make and keep records of hours, rates and pay ; by failing 
to include lawfully required information and payslips ; and failing to pay staff wages at least monthly for all hours 
worked and that you have commenced legal proceeding against UNSW.  That was particularly sad for me because 
I spent many years at the University of New South Wales as a student and then as a lecturer . I think when this 
case was reported that your organisation said :  
A corporate culture thereby existed within UNSW  that directed, encouraged, tolerated or led to non -compliance with the legal 
obligation to make and keep records of the kind prescribed by the Fair Work Act.  
Could you elaborate a bit more on the corporate culture ? Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 101 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Booth :  I'll say a couple of things from what I know, as it was one of the very early cases that came to my 
attention and I was asked to speak to the media about . I'll then ask Kate Anderson to elaborate. One feature of the 
University of New South Wales , which seems to be a common feature of other universities as well , is the 
devolution of operational responsibility for the payroll for casual academic staff, and the devolution is to 
academic managers who , it would appear , don't have the skill or the processes and have not been given the tools 
to correctly apply the relevant enterprise agreements.  
Senator FARUQI:   Why do you think that has happened? Is it because universities have got  rid of staff who 
were doing these functions and passing the functions on? Have you looked into that?  
Ms Booth :  We're not privy to the minds of the decision -makers in universities regarding  how they structure 
themselves , but it is what has been at least objectively apparent to the investigators when they have done their 
work.  
Ms K Anderson:   We have made allegations in relation to the University of New South Wales that are 
currently before a court , so I wouldn't like to express a view in relation to that particular university at the moment. 
We can speak in generalities but I think we have traversed that previously.  
Senator FARUQI:   That's fair. I want to dive a bit deeper into this corporate culture you have spoken about . Is 
that also across the sector and , if so, is it that corporate culture that is leading to wage theft and casualisation ? 
Ms K Anderson:   We said previously  we have certainly seen some very common practices across the sector. 
As Mrs Booth said, it goes to who is responsible for interpreting the agreement s and then applying them in 
particular contexts. We 've seen a separation of industrial relations  and human resource type functions and payroll 
functions . We have gone as far as to say to the Universities Accord panel , in particular , that in certain instances 
where budgetary constraints are requiring certain contracts to be time  limited, that  that can also have a flow -on 
effect in this space of underpayments.  
Senator FARUQI:   The 2022 -23 report also points out and identifies several trends contributing  to non -
compliance , and one of those trends  in fact the first one on this list  is the high number of casual workers . I've 
had this conversation with Ms Parker before. In your conversations has this issue of casualisation and its link to 
wage theft and underpayment been brought up with university vice chancellors and management ? If so,  what has 
their response been ? 
Ms K Anderson:   A big part of what we're attempting to do in the university space  is to influence cultural 
change around their practices. It's not a matter for the ombudsman how they utilise a casual workforce or 
otherwise, as long as it 's done lawfully within the terms of the Fair Work Act and people are paid what they 're 
due. What we are attempting to do is work collaboratively through the accord panel , who might have that broader 
purview about  the use of utilisation of casual staff , in particular . We're bringing up what we're seeing through our 
investigations for their consideration and then work ing very  cooperatively with the Department of Education  at 
the moment . 
Senator FARUQI:   Did y ou bring up the issue of the high number of casual workers?  
Ms K Anderson:   We've brought up that our investigations are largely to do with both casual professional and 
casual academic staff.  
Senator FARUQI:   What proportion of the office resources would you say the office  spend s in investigating 
university wage theft?  
Ms Booth :  I'll ask Mr Campbell to comment. That would both require an analysis of what the industrial 
compliance branch  budget  is and , of that, what proportion of that is spent on investigations and , of that,  what 
proportion is spent on investigations in universities , so it would be like a decision tree.  
Senator FARUQI:   If you don't have that number now, you could take it on notice. Even i f you have some 
idea of the proportion that you have spent in the last two years on investigating universities , that would be great. 
But, i f not, then please take it on notice.  
Ms K Anderson :  What I can say is that we have got active matters across six investigations teams at the 
moment. I would say that all of our investigations team s have at least one university matter in their workload at 
the moment.  
Senator FARUQI:   All of your teams have one . 
Ms K Anderson :  At least one.  
Senator FARUQI:   You said six matters.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 102 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms K Anderson :  There are six investigations teams within the organisation, and every one of them has at 
least one.  
Senator FARUQI:   So it is a significant amount of work.  
Ms K Anderson :  Absolutely.  
Senator FARUQI:   I also understand that your office often relies on whistleblowers and self-reporting  to find 
out about issues of underpayment  and wage theft  and that  the office is not really resourced to do proactive audits 
in this space.  
Ms K Anderson :  That's correct.  
Senator FARUQI:   Given what you've seen and what  has happened , and there might be a lot more, would you 
like your office to be resourced to be able to do those audits so this can be addressed in a more systemic  way?  
Ms Booth :  That's probably best for the Fair Work Ombudsman to answer. I think the answer is that  and I 
must say I've heard my predecessor , Sandra Parker , say this before  all regulators would like more resources. 
What I can say is that I've observed , in the first seven weeks of my time as Fair Work Ombudsman , that the 
resources are very carefully applied , and, with the number of investigations and the spread across the teams that 
Ms Anderson has described, they're a very effective group.  
Senator FARUQI:   I'm not doubting that. I just feel that it's a systemic issue, and, to address it in a systemic 
way, you obviously can't just keep relying on self -reporting. Would you agree with that?  
Ms Booth :  Indeed. The twin pillars , if you like,  that we have to move Australian workplaces further towards 
compliance universally are education and enforcement , and  the two go hand in hand . Enforcement isn't binary 
either ; there are  a range of different enforcement tools that are used . But we're very focused on prevention 
through education and awareness -raising . Where the enforcement takes a role there is when circumstances 
become public . We are making a real effort to make sure that everybody knows about it, particularly the sector 
itself . It's early days for me in stakeholder consultation , but I intend to meet with the Higher Education Industrial 
Association as well as the  NTEU  to discuss these matters further.  
Senator FARUQI:   In terms of that education effort that you are doing with universities, how many 
universities have you engaged in those education awareness programs?  
Ms K Anderson :  I'd have to take the exact number on notice, but we have certainly sought to actively put out 
further information for the sector . We've conducted webinars with payroll officers, for example, which I 
understand w ere I would have to take the exact number on notice  very highly subscribed , and we will 
continue to program those sorts of education offerings so that we can really communicate our education package 
or offerings out to the sector as widely as possible.  
Senator FARUQI:   If you wouldn't mind , could you provid e that on notice and the name s of the universities, 
if that can be made publi c? This is the last question from me, Chair. As you know, in the last financial year, 
universities were on your priority list. Is it the case for 2023 -24 as well that universities are on the priority list?  
Ms Booth :  Yes, it is . 
Senator FARUQI:   Thank you so much.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you, Chair. Thank you for being here today again. My understanding is that the 
role of the Fair Work Ombudsman is to investigate grievances and attempt to resolve disputes between workers 
and their alleged employers as they arise from application of the Fair Work Act.  Is that correct?  
Ms Booth :  The way I would put it  is to reflect the function of the Fair Work Ombudsman from the Fair Work 
Act, which is to promote harmonious , productive , cooperative and compliant  workplaces . I think what you 're 
referring to is a subset of compliance . We certainly have a series of subsidiary functions as well set out . And, in 
practical terms, we do regard ourselves as dispute resolvers , and t hat particularly takes place when people call the 
Fair Work Ombudsman to ask for advice . When they 're not able to be satisfied with only getting information, they 
move to what we call our assessment  process.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Going back to the start of your answer, the Fair Work Ombudsman derives its authority 
from the Fair Work Act, correct?  
Ms Booth :  Section 682.  
Senator ROBERTS:   To whom  is the Fair Work Ombudsman accountable?  
Ms Booth :  The Fair Work Ombudsman is the  accountable authority. We are an agency of the government. 
Obviously , as the Fair Work Ombudsman, I am  accountable to parliament.  One of the reaches of our Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 103 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  accountability is being here today. The minister obviously is the overarching strategic director, but we are 
independent of the government because of our agency status, derived from the Fair Work Act. The minister can, 
and indeed has recently, provided expectation s to the agency . But, at an operational level , the accountability 
finishes with me, subject to the processes of committees like this one.  
Senator ROBERTS:   We've recently seen last month , in fact  an article saying that seven Western 
Australian enterprise  agreements are substandard as the result of fake deals . In this case it was just the prospective 
employer. The enterprise agreement  set terms and conditions of employment  far below industry standard. The 
Fair Work Commission approved them.  The Fair Work Commission is now holding an inquiry.  
Now I 'll go to an illegally approved enterprise agreement : Mr Simon Turner. You haven't been the ombudsman 
for long, so are  you familiar with that case?  
Ms Booth :  I wouldn't say I was familiar. I have been briefed that there was a matter that concerned a 
gentleman by that name, but I know nothing more than that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   His plight  I've raised previously in estimates. He's  had disappointing experiences with 
the Fair Work Ombudsman in relation to his ongoing grievance for not receiving his due entitlements while 
working on full -time permanent roster as a coalminer in a Hunter Valley coalmine. The  Black Coal Mining 
Industry Award  has no provision for casuals and yet Simon worked the standard scheduled ongoing roster , 
averaging 44.3 hours per week , for the whole year. Award full -time threshold , as you probably know , is 35 hours 
in the coal industry , and the national employment standard is 38 , yet he was labelled a casual , which is prohibited  
under  the black coal mining industry award . His employer was Chandler Macleod , a labour hire company that 
failed to provide him his entitlements and correct pay.  
As an aside , before we go into Chandler Macleod , the government has paid  Chandler Macleod  billions of 
dollars  I think it's around $2.4 billion for four years  for labour hire in government agencies  and departments, 
so right across Canberra and across government agencies. Chandler Macleod  owners are Japan 's Recruit 
Holdings, the world's largest labour hire firm.  
The roster that Simon worked was a full -time permanent roster , even though he was labelled a casual. The 
award payment  we've  now had several people check this  for that roster for Simon's hours is $137 ,000. He was 
paid $66,000.  That's the key thing that matters . The fact that other enterprise agreements are up here doesn't 
matter ; it's the award relative to the payment that Simon earned. That was $66,000. Clearly, there 's no casual 
loading in that one. It 's a casual penalty  penalty being labelled a casual despite working full -time hours. That's a 
breach , correct?  
Ms Booth :  To be clear , those  sorts of  matters would go to our investigation team and be informed by our 
lawyers. It would be quite inappropriate for me based on   
Senator ROBERTS:   But it is illegal to pay below the award ? 
Ms Booth :  I will turn to Ms Volzke, a lawyer.  
Ms Volzke :  We are going to talk about this more generally , as opposed to in relation to the circumstances of 
Mr Turner . We know that 15A , which has the casual definition, which is going to be changed with the closing the 
loopholes bill, has retrospective application even though it only came into effect in 2021.  So it applied to 
employment relationships that predated  it being   
Senator ROBERTS:   Contract relationships.  
Ms Volzke :  Employment relationships. It retrospectively applie d to that and it also ensures that post -
contractual conduct that happens before you enter into an employment arrangement isn't taken into account. So 
it's at that time that the determination is made as to whether or not someone is a casual within the meaning of 15A 
and then you've also got   
Senator ROBERTS:   We've also got to understand  and Murray Furlong can confirm this  that you cannot 
pay below the NES , you cannot pay below the award and you cannot make deals that include that.  
Ms Volzke :  Absolutely. As you know, there are a number of issues  that arise in relation to black coal mining 
and you and I have spoken about them more broadly . We have tried to look at all of the possible scenarios  and the 
employing entities to try and work out whether there might be entitlements owing and we make determinations on 
that and what the law currently is.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Let me take you to a Fair Work Ombudsman inquiry review, conducted in June 2018 , 
into what instrument covered Mr Turner's employment from 28 September 2014 to  4 June 2015. This is what they 
found , in a reply to Simon Turner : 'Based on the information provided to the Fair Work Ombudsman, t he review 
finds that the award applied from the commencement of your employment. The award applied from 28 September Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 104 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  2014 until 4 June 2015. This was because the available information suggested there was no enterprise  agreement 
capable of covering the employer and yourself at that time.' He was covered by the award , yet he was paid far less 
than the award.  
Ms Volzke :  It would be good if we don't get into the circumstances of that investigation about that particular 
person, but there was a subsequent correspondence that the Fair Work Ombudsman provided earlier this year.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Let's get on to that. This issue was reviewed in November 2021 by a Fair Work 
Ombudsman  investigator , who, surprisingly , came to an outrageous conclusion . Your investigator used a 
fabricated PAYG summary with inaccurate and misleading information , knowing it was wrong. That indicated Mr 
Turner was employed and paid by a totally different company, Ready Workforce , with a different ABN.  
This evidence  was definitively rebutted by the findings of the ATO , which held that there was no employment 
relationship between Ready Workforce and Mr Turner. A similar result was held in Judge Altobelli's  court 
decision where court evidence , including evidence under Mr Turner's name , indicated his true employer was 
Chandler Macleod  not Ready Workforce . That's also held by the ATO .  
At the last Senate estimates I tabled a letter  between Chandler Macleo d and the CFMEU  which might be 
called the Mining Energy Union now  that confirmed collusion between the employer and the union, where by 
the union agreed to sell out the union members if they wished for the union to push higher miner entitlements . 
Mr Scully :  Yes. 
Senator ROBERTS:   In July 2023, the Fair Work Ombudsman investigat or wrote to Simon Turn er and said 
he had found that Mr Turner was employed by Ready Workforce and had no claim against Chandler Macleod , 
despite the findings of the ATO and the fact that the ABN on all of Mr Turner's payslips  80 of them 
submitted  and his PAY G indicated the true employer was Chandler M acleo d. Your Fair Work Ombudsman 
investigator decision was based on ly on  one falsified , fabricated PAYG  summary , as found by the ATO. This 
decision is untenable  and raises questions on the legitimacy of the Fair Work Ombudsman's actions. Please tell 
me on notice what steps that Fair Work Ombudsman investigator took in his investigatio n. 
Mr Scully :  I think I can respond to some of those comments. T he letter that was provided to the person who 
requested our assistance  was comprehensive,  and it has effectively  provided a very detailed explanation as to how 
our Fair Work  inspector arrived at his decision that Ready Workforce was the employer. Can I just say that we 
bring an independent and impartial approach to enforcing the law as it stands. The  Fair Work inspector who has 
been leading this investigation and other associated investigations is very experienced and very competent and is 
actually a team leader within the organisation , so I have a lot of confidence in his abilities   
Senator ROBERTS:   You might have confidence, but he 's used a fraudulent , forged document that the ATO 
has confirmed is wrong.  
Mr Scully :  Well, can I just say  that  
Senator ROBERTS:   You can't get around that.  
Mr Scully :  My understanding is that the correspondence  from the ATO  that you're referring to has not been 
provided to the Fair Work inspector , and a reasonable explanation has been provided in respect of  why the  PAYG 
and the  payslips were in the name of Chandler Macleod at the time. So all that information has been included in 
the comprehensive response that  has gone back to the person requesting our assistance.  
CHAIR:   Senator  Roberts , I know  you have  some  more questions. It might  be of assistance , at some given 
point,  if that documentation  the ATO material  were  made available  to the Fair Work Ombudsman. The Fair 
Work Ombudsman said that they don't have it. That may be of some assistance to any other future considerations 
the Fair Work Ombudsman may  or may not  make.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Am I still going?  
CHAIR:   You've got two more minutes.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. Do you agree that it 's against the law to pay an employee less than the 
award?  
Ms Booth :  Yes, I do.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. Are you aware that the only way employees are illegally  paid less than the 
award in the coal sector is under a Mining and Energy  Union  enterprise agreement that the Fair Work 
Commission approved?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 105 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Booth :  I wouldn't conclude that , because of a section of the Fair Work Act  which I think from memory 
might be section 252, but I could have that section incorrect  that provides that, if  an enterprise agreement has an 
amount of wages that is lower than the award, the award prevails.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. In Mr Turner's case , that enterprise agreement was approved  with no BOOT, 
and a letter from the Fair Work Commission  confirms that there was no BOOT. It happens when the enterprise 
agreement is submitted with false and misleading Mining and Energy Union stat decs and the Fair Work 
Commission does not apply the BOOT contained in the agreement analysis checklist, which is mandatory under 
the Fair Work Act. No BOOT was done.  
Ms Booth :  I'm not able to comment on the Fair Work Commission's operations  anymore.  
Senator ROBERTS:   The Fair Work Commission's  Stanton hearing identified Chandler Macleod  Group's  
employment of employees like Simon Turner as being under the award , and thus they were illegal casuals. The 
Mining and Energy Union agreed not to prosecut e, as we heard a little while ago , and you've confirmed that you  
got that copy last Senate estimates. The Mining and Energy Union agreed not to prosecute Chandler Macleod  
over entitlements  if they got an agreement. The Mining and Energy Union agreed not to prosecute if Chandler 
Macleod employees were identified as casuals. In the enterprise agreement approval documents, it  states that zero 
casuals voted on the enterprise agreement. No people voted for the enterprise agreement. Fair Work 
Commissioner Harrison approved the  enterprise  agreement without applying the statutory agreement analysis 
checklist  for the BOOT.  Why isn't this being resolved?  
Ms Booth :  I'll have to take you back to  Mr Scully or Ms Volzke.  
Ms Volzke :  Senator, last time we spoke about this, and I think we also have spoken about the fact that I am 
not aware that it has been authoritatively determined that the black coal  mining award not providing for casuals in 
operational roles necessarily means it's prohibited. There actually is some legal   
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about when they were employed under the award, 
in the first place.  
Ms Volzke :  But this is what I'm saying. You're saying that because the award doesn't provide for casuals then 
that necessarily means they must be ongoing employees, because that's what   
Senator ROBERTS:   They're working a full -time roster which is well above the award base hours of 35 hours 
a week, well above the NES.  
Ms Volzke :  Yes, but, as I have mentioned, when you look at section 15A, as the retrospective definition, and 
also the Personnel and Jamsek High Court decisions, which also reinforce the primacy of the employment 
contract, what actually occurs post -contractually isn't taken into account.  
CHAIR:   This is your final question, Senator.  
Senator ROBERTS:   These and many more breaches have been discussed before. They reveal systematic, 
repeated practices and evidence that what was the CFMEU and is now the Mining Energy Union gained 
financially and its officers have demonstrable conflicts of interests and possibly gain financially themselves. Are 
you going to investigate that?  
Ms Volzke :  As Mr Scully has already spoken about, it is our job as the impartial regulator to apply the law as 
it currently stands, and that is what we have done. And in our investigations we've also tried to examine where we 
think there might have been some uncertainty as to who the true employer was in relation to the employees. We 
set out both scenarios and worked through and unfortunately still came to the conclusion  for different reasons, 
depending on who that entity might be  that there weren't any entitlements owing.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms Booth, since the functions of the ABCC transferred to the FWO, how many sit e 
visits have been undertaken?  
Ms Booth :  I will ask Ms Volzke to commence the response to that question.  
Ms Volzke :  Absolutely.  We've had five investigations that have included site inspections as a necessary 
investigative step, and in total there have been 10 site inspections across eight sites for those investigations.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   What's the time period for those numbers?  
Ms Volzke :  I'd have to take that on notice, but I can tell you  because we had the conversation with Senator 
Cash at the last estimates  that we said we hadn't undertaken any site inspections. So, you can safely assume that 
it was after last estimates. It will be post  May.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Post the budget estimates.  
Ms Volzke :  Actually   Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 106 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms K Anderson :  The first site inspection that we found it necessary to conduct in relation to one of our 
matters was on 10 July 2023.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So, five investigations and 10 site inspections.  
Ms K Anderson :  That's correct.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms Booth, in terms of your future approach, plan, where you're taking the 
organisation, can you talk about how you prioritise site visits?  
Ms Booth :  I'm not able to do that at this point. It's quite an operational question, so I will turn again to either 
Ms Volzke or Ms Anderson.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   How do you determine when a site visit is required versus when it isn't?  
Ms K Anderson :  We obviously have a range of investigative tools that are available to our inspectors, and we 
determine to conduct a site inspection when we think it is important for us to be at the site to gather evidence or 
information from that particular site.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Is that a formal matrix or an informal decision -making process?  
Ms K Anderson :  That is part of our investigative planning process, and it's done on an as -needs basis. It 's not 
driven by a predetermined need. We'll follow where the evidence is leading us.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So it' s not as a matter of course in an investigation?  
Ms K Anderson :  No, Senator, it' s not.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   It's up to the individual investigators . Mr Scully?  
Mr Scully :  Further to the evidence that Ms Anderson has provided, site inspections play an important role in 
our work . It enables our Fair Work inspectors to go on site. They may do that to serve notices, to obtain evidence 
or to undertake audits or part of our campaigns. So it's an important part of our work. But it is on a case -by-case 
basis as to whether a site inspection is required or not . That's in respect of our investigations , the reactive part of 
our work. In the proactive part of our work, we have a program of proactive work   
Senator BROCKMAN:   Site inspections.  
Mr Scully :  site inspections  which are primarily targeted to our priority areas, such as fast food restaurants and 
catering, the agriculture sector and the like, and building and construction. We have a program of site inspections 
that we undertake during the year. That can include, under the fast food restaurants and catering sector, our 
national food precincts work, where we go around and we do audits in a number of cheap -eat precincts. We also 
have our agriculture strategy, where we plan to visit 15 high -risk sectors and undertake priority  audits there.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Sorry, 15 high -risk sectors?  
Mr Scully :  Locations. Pardon me if I said sectors.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Locations within high -risk sectors?  
Mr Scully :  It's within the high -risk and priority sector called agriculture that there are 15 hotspots that have 
been identified through our intelligence.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So within agriculture you're planning to undertaking 15. In building and 
construction, how many are you planning to undertake?  
Mr Scully :  We are developing that , based on our intelligence. We are still working on the plan with respect to 
our proactive work in building and construction.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Can you list the priority areas quickly?  
Mr Scully :  Yes. The priority areas for 2023 -24 are agriculture ; fast food restaurants and catering ; large 
corporates and universities ; and the care sector. The care sector is a new priority, coming in this year. But they're 
our four. And then, underpinning all that work is our continued emphasis on and priority of vulnerable workers, 
as well as supporting small business employers.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   But building and construction 's not in the re? 
Ms Booth :  In addition to building and construction, Mr Scully was saying.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I'm just wondering how you choose to prioritise agriculture for 15 inspections, but 
you've got none planned for building and construction.  
Mr Scully :  We are programming and we are developing our plan for building and construction. We just 
haven't finalised that at this point. The reason why we're more advanced in other sectors is that our agriculture Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 107 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  strategy was approved in December 2021, so we've been working on that for a couple of years, so that is more 
advanced. We are working on our proactive plan for building and construction, but it's still being developed.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Could you update the committee on that plan once it's more advanced  or is that a 
work in progress?  
Mr Scully :  No, I think by the time we appear at the next Senate estimates it will be certainly well advanced.  
Ms K Anderson :  Senator, could I add  that actually a number of the site inspections that have already been 
conducted that we mentioned earlier had in fact been proactive site inspections, where we have been utilising our 
intelligence base to go to sites to see whether contraventions that  might have been alleged  could in fact be made 
out. What I would probably also draw your attention to about the priority sector of building and construction  is 
that we are also planning proactive  work that's looking at potential wage underpayment s in the building and 
construction sector  as well  and that program of work is also in the process of being planned  just to ensure, as 
Mr Scully says, that we 're putting our inspectors in spaces where there will be the most benefit.  
Ms Booth :  And I'd like to add that of course building and construction is both the domestic and the 
commercial sector  it's the whole sector.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Absolutely.  This question is just in relation to building and construction  
particularly, building on questions at the previous estimates about some interactions between the CFMMEU and 
women on building sites. I believe that Senator Cash asked Ms Parker how the Fair Work Ombudsman would 
undertake to protect female inspectors. Ms Parker undertook to implement a risk assessment on the safety of 
female inspectors on building and construction sites. Has this been done?  
Ms Booth :  We have both a risk assessment and a risk treatment program for our inspectors generally. As to 
the specifics of building and construction, I can't comment. I might ask Mr Campbell or Mr Ronson to speak 
about the safety measures which are taken to protect Fair Work inspectors.  
Mr Ronson :  Sorry, Senator, could you repeat the question?  
Senator BROCKMAN:   It was a bit of a longwinded question! At the previous estimates, we asked about the 
CFMMEU and the treatment of women on building sites. In particular, Ms Parker undertook to look at protecting 
female inspectors on building sites. She undertook to implement a risk assessment, which I understand does exist. 
I'd like to hear about what work was done in that particular area. Did it make any findings, or are you doing 
anything differently after that building of a risk assessment?  
Mr Ronson :  I provided evidence in November late last year, I think it was, when Senator Cash asked similar 
questions. That's probably where Sandra Parker provided those assurances and commitments. Since then, and in 
readiness for the new function  the new jurisdiction  obviously, we have conducted what we would said we 
would do, which was to review all our guidelines. I think we've provided evidence before  yes, going back, it 
was in answer to questions  that we have recorded something like 101 security incidents in the period from 2009 
to 2022. So it has always been a primary consideration for the Fair Work Ombudsman. As model employers and 
so forth we have to ensure that the safety of our workers is paramount.  
You would appreciate that in workplace relations, which is a highly personalised, if you like, interaction 
between employers and employees, it's not uncommon for parties to be engaged emotionally. They can be highly 
invested, and it's important for us to ensure that our inspectors are trained and ready to deal with all sorts of 
responses and treatments. So we have done a lot of work over the years. We reviewed our training; we reviewed 
all the courses and programs that we offer. In preparation for the new jurisdiction, I might just refer to Ms 
Anderson, because I think there were two or three specific instances where we had white -card training and so 
forth, which were supplementary to what we currently have going.  
Ms K Anderson :  That's correct. Rather than Ms Parker necessarily saying that we would do a holistic risk 
assessment of the building and construction industry,  I think her evidence was, potentially, that we would check 
our individual risk assessments. Obviously, we do a risk assessment whenever anybody  any of our inspectors  
goes to a site. That's on a case -by-case basis. We have certainly assessed whether that risk assessment , which is 
used by all of our inspectors,  is fit for purpose in the building and construction sector.  
As is largely the case across a lot of sectors, we have mandated that it will be two inspectors who go to a site 
inspection at any one time. That's based on our assessment of the OH&S risks that can be prevalent on a large 
commercial building site.  Obviously , as Mr Ronson said, supplementary to that, all of the inspectors in the 
Industrial Compliance Branch do actually undertake to obtain a white card as part of their onboard ing and their 
training . Again, that goes to the OH &S and our capacity to ensure their safety on building sites.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 108 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BROCKMAN:   I'm happy to leave it there , but, on notice , could you say what changes to the risk 
assessment and risk treatment processes  occurred , if any  I accept the re may not have been any  changes  after 
the transfer of the functions of the ABCC?  
Unidentified speaker:   Yes. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms Booth, this predates you, but at a previous estimates round the issue of 'no ticket, 
no start' signs in Adelaide was brought to Ms Parker's attention, and there was an undertaking to monitor the 
situation. Is someone able to provide an update on that?  
Ms K Anderson :  Yes, I can say that we have, in fact, conducted a number of site visits in Adelaide at some of 
the sites that I think were mentioned last estimates.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So you've undertaken site visits. Can you tell us if there have been any outcomes 
from that? What   
Ms K Anderson :  Not at this stage. We will obviously continue to monitor the situation, and I think it was 
possibly four sites that were identified. Our inspectors have attended those sites , and, at that point in time, there 
were no contraventions that warranted any further investigation.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Have you had any suggestions that this has also been an issue in Western Australia?  
Ms K Anderson :  There is one particular site, I think  which was brought to our attention  and which we're 
also aware of  that we discussed at last estimates, which is the Edith Cowan University site. I can also confirm 
that our inspectors have also attended that site. Again, they spoke  to a number of people on site, and there were no 
concerns raised with  them . 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Have you been provided with any photographic material of these sites?  
Ms K Anderson :  We had inspectors who attended site s in person. Are you alluding to the Facebook post  that 
we discussed last estimates?  
Senator BROCKMAN:   No, I was just wondering if you had been given material   
Ms K Anderson :  In relation to the Edith Cowan University site?  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Either or any  Adelaide , Edith C owan   
Ms K Anderson :  No, we have not been provided with any photographic material.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Since May 2022 how many times has the Fair Work Ombudsman been invited to 
intervene in righ t-of-entry permit applications by the Fair Work Commission?  
Ms Volzke :  I'm not sure that I would characterise it as 'intervening'. As you would recall, before the ABCC 
was abolished, it had an automatic right to intervene in court and FWC matters that involved building industry 
participants . That's not the same for the Fair Work Ombudsman , so it's only if the Fair Work Commission 
decides , as part of informing itself    
Senator BROCKMAN:   I did say 'invite to intervene'  or invite to join, if you prefer that language. How 
many times has it happened?  
Ms Volzke :  What I'd say is that we were asked whether there was any additional information that we might be 
able to provide , which may or may not have included making submissions ourselves , in relation to six matters . 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms Booth, since you took up   
CHAIR:   Senator Brockman, I think   
Senator BROCKMAN:   Have I run out of time?  
CHAIR:   Yes, you have. Senator Roberts has some questions.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   I've just got a few more , so I shouldn't take too long if I get the call back.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Fair Work Ombudsman, I've just been in touch with Simon Turner . He said quite clearly 
that the Fair Work Ombudsman has been provided with the ATO ruling  on the ABN.  Secondly, Chandler 
Macleod Group was the employer , as deemed by the Federal Court , and you're aware of that too or your office 
is. The contract for the providing labour hire services was  between Chandler Macleod and BHP  not Ready 
Workforce and BHP. I think you've been provided with that too. The Fair Work Ombudsman investigator is 
relying on one forged document versus the ATO , the court ruling, the Chandler  Macleod  and BHP contract , a 
PAYG sum mary from Mr Turner and pay slips  80 of them.  There is no contract between Simon Turner and 
Ready Workforce  none at all. Even if there was, the contact cannot remove the award, as you confirmed  earlier. 
You cannot pay below the award.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 109 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  I'll read out the court decision on the O ne Key dispute. This is Justices Bromber g, Katzmann and O'Callaghan, 
noted in One Key Workforce Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union  [2018] FCAFC 77 , 
paragraph 203 . This is a  part extract:  
Production and engineering employees covered by the BCMIA had no rights to casual conversion, as they could not be 
employed as casuals. It follows that the effect of the Agreement for such employees or prospective employees was that they 
could lose the job security guaranteed by the award as well as the additional benefits of permanent employment . 
Paragraph 204  this is a part extract again  reads:  
It is an error of law to fail to have regard to relevant material in a way that affects the exercise of power. An administrat ive 
decision -maker who makes such an error exceeds his or her authority and acts without jurisdiction . 
The administrative decision -maker, in this case, is a Fair Work Commissioner; that's in that law case.  
Ms Volzke :  As we've traversed before, a  number of these issues were fully ventilated in the investigation. I 
think the decision that you refer to didn't involve Mr Turner   
Senator ROBERTS:   That's quite clear.  
Ms Volzke :  as a plaintiff , so you can't directly take  
Senator ROBERTS:   The Fair Work Ombudsman has been provided  with the ATO; you told us it had not 
been. Chandler Macleod group was the employer, deemed by the Federal Court in another decision. The contract 
for providing labour hire services was between Chandler Macleod and BHP, not Ready Workforce.  The Fair 
Work Ombudsman is relying on one forged document  you have not raised that  versus five legitimate 
documents , including a court ruling.  
Ms Volzke :  No. What I said to you was that I thought that there was some legal uncertainty about who was 
the correct   
Senator ROBERTS:   There is no uncertainty  court ruling, ATO , Chandler Macleod , BHP contract.  
Ms Volzke :  But w hat I'm saying is  that we looked   
CHAIR:   Can I interrupt for a moment. Senator, t here are  a number of detailed comments in that question that 
need to be unpacked. I'm not sure whether the department 's indicating they've got an answer now or whether they 
need to take it on notice , because of the details , to get a written response to some of the accusations and  the issues 
you've raised. I'm just trying to get some guidance about where we're going . 
Ms Volzke :  Understood , and thank you, Chair . All I would say is that our letter closing the investigation 
examined the potential for both Chandler Macleod and Ready Workforce to be the employer , because it was 
unclear. It wasn't one or the other. On balance, we think that Ready Workforce was the employer, but the letter 
also dealt with the alternative . That's  the only point I would make . 
Senator ROBERTS:   You're saying again that, because you've come to that conclusion , it's okay to go against 
an ATO document  or an ATO decision. I t's okay to go against a court ruling and it 's okay to go against a Chandler 
Macleod -BHP contract . It's okay to go against 80 payslips  and Simon Turner's own PAYG . And you're relying on 
a forged document . That's the standard of the Fair Work Ombudsman and that is why we are now in this mess . 
Simon Turner has been denied his rights for nine years . 
Mr Scully :  Can I just clarify  we do not accept that it 's a forged document.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I'm telling you it is.  
Mr Scully :  Our inspector has done a detailed investigation of that and has spoken to Chandler Macleod about 
why the entity appeared as it did on the payslip , and a reasonable excuse has been provided in terms of limitations 
around the payroll system, which is also covered   
Senator ROBERTS:   You're ignoring five legitimate pieces of evidence.  
CHAIR:   Can Mr Scully get a chance to answer the question . 
Mr Scully :  I was just going to continue on to say that that is covered in the letter, in terms of the reasons. Our 
Fair Work inspectors  contacted Chandler Macleod and the explanation that has been provided is acceptable.  As I 
said, we are impartial. We take an independent review. We 've had a very senior , capable and experienced Fair 
Work inspector investigating this matter over a long period of time, and I believe the decision that he's made and 
the detailed conclusion that he's come to  which, as Ms Volzke has said, contemplates both scenarios in terms of 
employers  sets out quite clearly the situation  and the issues , and the conclusion is that there are no further 
entitlements owed to the individual.  
Senator ROBERTS:   These are not accusations, Mr Scully . There's a court ruling , an ATO document, PAYG 
summaries and  a contract between BHP and Simon Turner's employer, Chandler Macleod. Ready  Workforce did Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 110 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  not have the contract  there . How could they possibly be employing labour hire people at a mine where they did 
not have a contract?  
Mr Scully :  Well, I said the   
Senator ROBERTS:   I'd be feeling awkward too , if I w ere you. 
Mr Scully :  I don't feel  awkward  at all, because I'm very confident in the detailed investigation  that's been 
done by our Fair Work inspector.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I don't  put confidence in statements that someone's confident ; I put confidence in facts 
and documents.  
Mr Scully :  Yes, and t he facts are set out in this document. The  fact is that there was a contract between Ready 
Workforce and the individual , which was the term of employment, which clearly set out that that person was a 
casual . Like I said,  I think it's set out very clearly in the   
Senator ROBERTS:   Even so, the contract cannot remove the award , as the Fair Work Ombudsman 
confirmed earlier today. The contract cannot remove the award , but t hat's what 's happened to Simon Turner.  
Mr Scully :  The contract set out who the employ ing entity was  and therefore   
Senator ROBERTS:   Regardless of that, the contract cannot remove the award.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts, final question?  
Senator ROBERTS:   That's it ; thank you.  
CHAIR:   We'll now adjourn for five minutes   
Senator BROCKMAN:   I meant f ive minutes of questions.  
CHAIR:   My apologies. I misunderstood. I thought I was  negotiating a five-minute break ! Over to Senator 
Brockman.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Just really quickly , six you didn't like the word 'intervene'  invitations to make a 
submission?  
Ms Volzke :  Yes, o r provide additional information , and we've certainly given that undertaking in each of 
those matters , where we've got information which is uniquely within our knowledge, and that would go to the 
compliance history  if there were findings of contraventions  of industrial laws by  particular officials.  We would 
have that, and we said we would be very happy to provide those.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   In those six invitations, have you provided a submission in each case?  
Ms Volzke :  No. What we asked for  there 's the application that is made  that supports the permit application 
for the particular official . We've been provided with that , and we've made sure , from our perspective , in looking 
at industrial law contravention history , that it is accurate . If it were not then we would seek to  bring that to the 
attention of the Fair Work Commission , but we haven't had cause to do that, because we 've been  able to verify 
what was in th at application.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   But then do you make a nil submission or   
Ms Volzke :  Correct.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   do you just go silent?  
Ms Volzke :  No. We'd certainly tell the Fair Work Commission  that we ha ve nothing   
Senator BROCKMAN:   So you would go back to the Fair Work Commission and say, 'There is no need for 
us to make a more complex submission in this matter' ? 
Ms Volzke :  Correct.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Ms Booth , do you have a view on whether people with criminal convictions should 
be granted right -of-entry permits or whether the Fair Work Ombudsman should , as a matter of course,  provide a 
submission when invited to in such instances?  
Ms Booth :  I have a view that the Fair Work Commission applies the provisions of the registered organisations 
act and the Fair Work Act appropriately , and I confirm Ms Volzke's evidence to you that , when a matter is before 
the commission and we have uniquely possessed information that we consider should be brought to the attention 
of the Fair Work Commission, we do so.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   And criminal convictions would pass that threshold ? 
Ms Booth :  It would be a matter of applying the law as it stands.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 111 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator BROCKMAN:   But it would pass that threshold. I accept that it's a matter of applying the law as it 
stands, but criminal convictions would pass that threshold.  
Ms Booth :  You are probing an area  that I'm not a lawyer and I'm just not confident in answering yes or no, 
because I haven't practised in that jurisdiction.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Fair enough. From past experience,  Ms Volzke ? 
Ms Volzke :  I think we did traverse this last estimates as well. Obviously criminal history is usually a state 
based matter . That is n't information that we would be privy to . We are in no better position to be able to make 
those inquiries than what the FWC, which is the body under the legislation that's tasked to make an assessment of 
those permit  qualification matters , would be . 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Okay. I can see that. How many act ive cases were taken over from the ABCC?  
Ms Volzke :  Forty -one. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Can you run through their broad status  finalised, discontinued  and, on notice, if 
matters have been discontinued, the reasons.  
Ms Volzke :  Yes. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Is that published?  
Ms Volzke :  What I was going to say was that last estimates Senator Cash and I had an exchange on this, and 
in SQ23 -000723 I set out information about the status of all of the cases. I can tell you that , as of today's date , 24 
matters have been finalised . Of those 24, 16 have been concluded  by way of a judgement or penalty being  handed 
down, eight have been discontinued and 17 remain before the courts . So there are 17.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Of the eight that were discontinued, is that different to the number in SQ23 -000723 ? 
Ms Volzke :  Yes, it is. Since that time there have been two matters, Brisbane South State Secondary College 
and Huntington Apartments, that have been discontinued , but the discussion in that question on notice as to the 
kinds of matters that informed our consideration to make that decision remain equally relevant to those two 
matters.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Alright. Thank you very much. I understand that the Federal Court imposed a total of 
$62,000 in penalties against the CFMMEU and two of its former officials for unlawful conduct in the Brisbane 
construction site at the Central Energy Towers project in South Brisbane. The CFMMEU has been penalised 
$50,000, former official Andrew Blakeley has been penalised $7  thousand and formal official Beau Seiffert  has 
been  penalise d $4  thousand . Can you take us through the case and what it was about ? This was one of the cases 
you took over from the ABCC . Is that correct or not?  
Ms Booth :  Yes. 
Ms Volzke :  The penalty judgement was handed down on 20 September 2023 . On that day Justice  Thomas in 
the Federal Court delivered judgement on penalty i n the case against the CFMMEU and the two officials , which  
had commenced on 13 July 2021 . That  would  have been when the ABCC had carriage of the matter , before it 
transferred to us. In that case, the ABCC , as it  then was , alleged that in November 2020 Mr Blakeley and Mr 
Seiffert acted in an improper manner while exercising right of entry . The applicant alleged that Mr Blakeley 
directed workers to cease work when he had no powers to do so and used offensive language towards a site 
manager.  They've made admissions , and t here was an amended defence filed . The matter proceeded straight to 
penalties. That matter was heard on 30 September 2022, and his honour made declarations that Mr Blakeley 
contravened section 500 and that Mr Se iffert and the CFMMEU were knowingly involved by reason of section 
550. 
Senator BROCKMAN:   Thank you very much. Thank you, Chair, for your indulgence.  
CHAIR:   We have a break scheduled, but we thought we might just push on because things are looking good. 
Let's say it that way. I don't want to get anyone's hopes up. Thank you very much to the Fair Work Ombudsman 
for joining us tonight. We'll see you all again. You are now excused.  
Fair Work Commission  
[21:23]  
CHAIR:   Welcome . General Manager  Mr Furlong, would you like to make an opening statement?  
Mr Furlong :  No, thank you.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 112 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you for being here again, Mr Furlong and your colleagues. Who at the Fair Work 
Commission is responsible for carrying out investigations of the failure of a work commissioner?  
Mr Furlong :  Do you mind if I just ask for a little bit more information, Senator?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Who's responsible for carrying out investigations  into the  failure s of a fair work 
commission er? 
Mr Furlong :  Are you talking from the perspective  of the decisions of members?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes. 
Mr Furlong :  There are appeal mechanisms in place. The Fair Work Commission is a tribunal, a  quasi -judicial 
body, and under the Fair Work Act , which establishes the commission , agreed parties can make applications to 
the commission if they are unhappy with a decision of the commission.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I understand that that's appealing a decision , but, if a fair work commission er has made 
a wrongful decision or acted without the proper advice or accurate advice, isn't that your responsibility?  
Mr Furlong :  No. My role under the Fair Work Act is to assist the president in ensuring the Fair Work 
Commission performs its functions and exercises its powers.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I understand there's  a checklist that is provided to the member with the  information 
available to them to deal with the matter as they see fit. Is that what happens if someone complains?  
Mr Furlong :  Are you talking about  in the process of making enterprise agreement s there's a checklist?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes, or it exceeds their authority.  
Mr Furlong :  Do y ou mind if I deal with the first element about  the checklist?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Sure. 
Mr Furlong :  The checklist is a legislative checklist. We've traversed this in pre vious estimates . In terms of 
that checklist, I can take you to the QON as well, if it assists, SQ23000734. T he commission commenced a n 
administrative  process , which started in late 2014 , where we  started a pilot program to triage  some agreement 
applications before the commission. That pilot program was reviewed in 2015. That pilot program involved 
speciall y trained staff applying a legislative checklist to ensure that agreements that have come to the commission 
for consideration   
Senator ROBERTS:   The chair wa nts to move on . So you have no role in that?  
Mr Furlong :  In terms of the staff of the Fair Work Commission complet ing that checklist , what I was trying 
to get to  is that , at the point of the Chandler Macleod agreement being made, that process wasn't in place. And it's 
not a statutory r equirement that staff of the Fair Work Commission undertake that checklist . It's an admin istrative 
process or practice that we undertake to assist members in their decision -making.  
Senator ROBERTS:   What 's the process i f a fair work commission er acts out side jurisdiction by approving an 
enterprise agreement that was flawed and a n error of law?  
Mr Furlong :  That goes back to my earlier evidence that a party or an interested person can make an 
application for that decision to be reconsidered.  
Senator ROBERTS:   In the case of One Key Workforce versus Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy 
Union, 2018, Federal Court , AFC 77 , held by justices B romberg, Katzman and O'Callaghan, p aragraph 204  reads:  
It is an error of law to fail to have regard to relevant material in a way that affects the exercise of power. An administrative 
decision -maker who makes such an error exceeds his or her authority and acts without jurisdiction.  
The administrative decision -maker in this case is a fair work commissioner.  Have you reviewed Fair Work 
Commission er Stanton's hearing that we've discussed at previous estimates, matter No. C20151877?  
Mr Furlong :  No, and it's not my role to review decisions of the tribunal.  
Senator ROBERTS:   How does someone proceed with that?  
Mr Furlong :  My earlier evidence persists. An aggrieved party can make an application to have that 
decision  they c an make an application to appeal th at decision.  
Senator ROBERTS:   The relevance of this is the Fair Work Commission was told that Chandler Macleod 
employees are employed as casuals under the award, which was not allowed under the award. The Fair Work 
Commission just months later approved an enterprise agreement application from Chandler Macleod and the 
CFMEU. Their supporting stat dec stated that no casuals voted. So who voted on the EA?  
Mr Furlong :  We've covered this on notice as well. I think we took this question on notice. In our response , 
we provide d reasonable detail about  who actually voted on the agreement.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 113 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator ROBERTS:   Were all the casuals identified in the Fair Work Commission's Stanton matter employed 
illegally under the award? No casuals voted , but they were employed under the award . This is before the 
enterprise agreement.  
Mr Furlong :  The Fair Work Commission isn't responsible for ensuring enforcement or compliance with the 
Fair Work Act. That role falls within the  operation al remit of the Fair Work Ombudsman.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Let's move on to the BOOT . I've asked many questions in previous estimates hearing s 
about how the 2015 Chandler Mac leod enterprise agreement  supposedly passed the BOOT , and Fair Work 
representatives  have  said that it passed the BOOT as it was applied during the agreement analysis checklist. Ms 
Luby replied to questions on notice with this : 'I have since received written information from the Fair Work 
Commission that clearly states that after checking the file it does not contain the BOOT  assessment. It appears the 
BOOT  assessment was not undertaken  because if one was undertaken a copy of the assessment would be attached 
to the file. Mr Simon Turner has a complete copy of the file , which has no BOOT assessment attached. ' The 
BOOT  test was never done.  
Mr Furlong :  No, that's not the case . We've traversed this on notice  as well , and I refer you to EEC -AE21 -47. 
I'll read p art of that response  verbatim:  
Senior Deputy President Harrison issued a decision on 4 June 2015   
and then it's got the case citation   
  stating that she was "satisfied that each of the requirements of ss.186, 187 and 188 as are relevant to this application fo r 
approval have been met". These requirements include the better off overall test    
The BOOT requires the identification of agreement terms which are more beneficial, and the terms which are less beneficial, 
and then an overall assessment is made as to whether employees would be better off under the agreement than under the 
relevant award.  
Senator ROBERTS:   How is it that the award rate for the roster that Simon Turner was working  a full -time 
roster , 44.3 hours per week on average  is $137,000 a year  and he was paid $66,000 ? That's well below the 
award. How is that the case?  
Mr Furlong :  It's very difficult to talk in terms of that information . What I can say is that the Fair Work Act 
requires that agreements ensure employees are better off overall than they would be under  modern awards . 
Senator ROBERTS:   $66,000 is not better off than $137,000. Th at is the  award rate . The award rate  is more 
than double what the enterprise agreement rate was  more than double. No amount of paperwork and reference 
to laws is going to change that fact. You've told us that y ou cannot have conditions less than the award.  
Mr Furlong :  I'll clarify that evidence. The minimum rate of pay in an enterprise agreement  can't be  less than 
what is stipulated  under a  modern award.  
Senator ROBERTS:   If you're work ing an  average of  44.3 hours per week  and you 're getting paid $66,000 
then your rate per hour is far less than the award rate.  
Mr Furlong :  The evidence that I'm giving is that the Fair Work Act requires at least the minimum hourly rate 
of pay . That doesn't extend to penalties  or any loadings ; it is the minimum rate of pay for every hour that's 
worked.  
Senator ROBERTS:   At $66,000, t he minimum rate of pay is obviously far below  the rate of pay for the 
award.  
Mr Furlong :  You had the Fair Work Ombudsman here earlier , and their evidence   
Senator ROBERTS:   And they provided evidence that relied on a forged document. Don't tell me you're going 
to do the same?  
Mr Furlong :  No. What I'm going to say to you is that the Fair Work Ombudsman , who provided evidence 
earlier this evening   
Senator ROBERTS:   A forged document.  
Mr Furlong :  are the agency responsible for ensuring compliance with the Fair Work Act  and the instruments 
of the Fair Work Act , which include modern awards and enterprise agreements.  
Senator ROBERTS:   When was the last time you sighted the BOOT  for the 2015 Chandler Mac leod 
enterprise agreement?  
Mr Furlong :  Once again , it's not my role to oversee  or look at  the  
Senator ROBERTS:   When was the last time Ms L uby or another Fair Work Commission  staff member 
sighted the BOOT ? Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 114 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Mr Furlong :  I can't answer that.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Can you take it on notice and find out, please?  
Mr Furlong :  Certainly . 
Senator ROBERTS:   If it does not exist, then  and I noticed that the commissioner involved, Harrison, did 
not say she sighted the BOOT ; she said she was 'satisfied'.  
Mr Furlong :  She had to be satisfied in order to approve the agreement.  
Senator ROBERTS:   She was 'satisfied '. 
Mr Furlong :  Yes. 
Senator ROBERTS:   It doesn't mean she sighted the BOOT , which doesn't exist in the file.  
Mr Furlong :  She turned her mind to it, and, if you read the approval decision, it indicates that she was 
satisfied for each of the requirements of sections 186, 187 and 188, which include an assessment of the BOOT.  
Senator ROBERTS:   If it does not exist, then Senior Deputy President Harrison has acted ultra vires and the 
2015 enterprise agreement is invalid.  
Mr Furlong :  I don't agree  with your position. What I 'm saying is that the agreement was approved by the 
senior deputy president  at the time . As to the decision that accompanied the approval decision of that enterprise 
agreement  and I'll reiterate here  it indicated that the senior deputy president was satisfied that each of the 
requirements of sections 186, 187 and 188 were met   
Senator ROBERTS:   'She was satisfied ', yet there 's no BOOT on file. Mr Turner's claims must be resolved by 
paying him his true entitlements. Have you got any advice on how we can do that?  
Mr Furlong :  Ultimately  and I was in the room while the Fair Work Ombudsman were giving evidence as 
well  
Senator ROBERTS:   And they were relying on a forged document  one document , against five valid 
documents.  
Mr Furlong :  I understand that they investigated the matter. I think there may be some recourse to contacting 
the Commonwealth Ombudsman about that, but that's the extent of my knowledge of the area.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you. We've done better than that.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Just a forewar ning for you: I've got quite a detailed list of questions  which I'll put on 
notice  not as part of estimates , but as part of the inquiry that we have into the closing loopholes bill. I'll just 
make you aware of that, because the date for answers for those QONs will be earlier than what estimates will 
provide. So I'm just making you aware of that.  I did just want to ask  a more general question about the 
consultation  if there was any consultation that you were engaged with on the closing loopholes bill?  
Mr Furlong :  In the normal course, the Fair Work Commission, obviously,  don't enter the policy debate or 
conversation. Our involvement is largely limited to looking at and providing information or guidance on the 
resources that we may require in order to give effect to these new possible functions . So, in terms of   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It just went to what resourcing you might need.  
Mr Furlong :  Yes, and  at the officer level we've got  a strong operational relationship with the department, and 
it has always been thus  we've always provided information   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Any other areas , other than resourcing?  
Mr Furlong :  In terms of the resourcing element, we 've provided information about evidence  an evidence 
base, based on our current case management systems and practices and the resources that they require. So, in 
terms of the scope  of those conversations, they would expand to that. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   This is, again, at a higher level than down at the  issues related to the bill . Can you 
just talk me through the procedures you would have in place  on this example  understanding that, under the act, 
the commission is required to perform your functions and exercise your powers in a manner that is open and 
transparent. I don't know if you are familiar with the transport advisory group that would be involved if this bill 
were to pass. How would you deal with issues of disclosure and conflicts of interest when you  need to engage 
with stakeholders  let's say, for example, in the transport advisory group  or the expert advisory panel ? 
Mr Furlong :  I've read the bill, but I wouldn't claim to be an expert on it  nor should I  be, at this point  but 
in terms of the conflict of interest  and the way that I understand the scheme may operate is that it's an advisory 
board. It 'll advise members or benches of the commission, and then those members or benches, however they are Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 115 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  constituted,  will then  use that information as they see fit in making decisions. In terms of the conflicts of 
interest   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The conflict that comes to mind is if a member of the advisory group was also 
someone that would be bringing forward a case . How would you deal with the potential conflict of interest there?  
Mr Furlong :  It would be a matter for the benches or the members who were considering those cases to 
require the advisory board to disclose any of those conflicts and then treat them accordingly.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay.  
Mr Furlong :  It's obviously in the abstract, but  in the normal course of things  that's what I would expect. Can I 
just clarify my earlier evidence in terms of the engagement with the department? In rare circumstances , which  
have  happened previously , the advice that we can provide can extend to providing detailed information about very 
specific technical matters about the future operation of  but it's not about the policy intent or anything of that 
nature. It's specifically about technical issues that may arise in the administration of those reforms.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In this instance, did you go to that level of advice?  
Mr Furlong :  Not that I 'm aware of. I'll take that on notice. I want to make sure that I get that right.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I understand. That's fine. In your annual report, in relation to the modern awards pay 
database application program interface, the API, can you take us through the feedback that you've received in 
relation to it from the more than 70 organisations that have registered accounts for the API tool and how they use 
it? 
Mr Furlong :  I'll ask Ms Leggett. The number of people or organisations who have registered to use the 
application program interface has significantly increased since   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So it's more than 70?  
Mr Furlong :  It is, yes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I was going to ask why it 's so low. Has it gone up?  
Mr Furlong :  It has.  
Ms Leggett :  It has since the launch , which was on 20 March. As at 30 September, 80 users have  subscribed to 
the API tool  from a broad range of organisations , including payroll , software and compliance , software 
developers , employers, unions and workplace relations  legal specialists . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So a developer could be one of those 80?  
Mr Furlong :  Exactly. A very large payroll   
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   And they'll have many customers?  
Mr Furlong :  company could be one of those.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Like a MYOB payroll system, and they would have X number   
Ms Leggett :  Yes. The number is not necessarily indicative of how many.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thanks for clarifying that. And has there been any feedback so far?  
Ms Leggett :  We've had an even larger number than that who have  register ed interest  in continuing to use the 
testing environment, so we do expect the number to increase.  In terms of feedback, from recollection, we've he ard 
interest from those who' ve registered to use it that they are seeking to develop products that seek to use it , and we 
have regular engagement with those users and provide support where required . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I imagine it would be pretty popular among employers trying to navigate their way 
through the awards. Interfacing it with their system seems like a pretty good idea.  
Ms Leggett :  And I think w ith these types of tools, it is common for there to be some time required for the 
development of a final product and to incorporate that into larger systems.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In April , you will launch ed the new online Form F 2 for unfair dismissal  
applications , along with a refreshed online lodgement service for individual dispute applications. How is that 
going?  
Ms Scarlett :  The launch has been very positive. We 're currently tracking around 60 per cent of unfair 
dismissal lodgements each week being lodged through th at online F2 form and through th at online lodgement 
system.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I understand that you 're also focused on developing further digital smart forms 
across other areas.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 116 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Scarlett :  That's correct. We have a number of online forms in progress currently : the general protections 
involving dismissal application form , which is  F8, and our unfair dismissal employer response form, which is F3.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you have plans for other forms?  
Ms Scarlett :  Those are the forms that are currently  in progress.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are there more forms?  
Mr Furlong :  There are more forms, but they 're the ones we 're working on. They're our largest by volume. 
Ultimately, the vision  we receive between 32,000 and 33,000 applications each year  is to have approximately 
80 per cent of our applications by volume made via smart forms.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I want to ask about the regional allocation system, the model for managing cases. 
Can you advise for each region who the regional coordinator and the deputy regional coordinator are? I'm happy 
for you to take that on notice if it 's quite a list.  
Mr Furlong :  There are two regions. Region 1 takes in WA, New South Wales, the ACT and the Northern 
Territory. It 's Vice -President  Catanzariti . I'll just confirm that. It's on our website.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Are the national practice leaders also on the website?  
Mr Furlong :  They are. For region 1 Vice -President Catanzariti  is the regional coordinator and the deputy 
regional coordinator is Vice -President Asbury . For region 2, which is South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria, 
Deputy President Clancy  is the regional coordinator and he is supported by Deputy President O'Neill . All the 
national practice leaders are on there as well.  It's on the case allocation system part of our website.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Terrific. That's all from  me. Thanks for your time.  
CHAIR:   I thank the Fair Work Commission.  
Asbestos Safety and Eradication Agency  
[21:47]  
CHAIR:   Welcome. Ms Ross, would you like to make a short opening statement?  
Ms J Ross :  No. 
Senator Watt:   Good call, Ms Ross.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you for being with us this evening, Ms Ross. We have detained you for a 
while. You'll be pleased to know that I don't have too many questions for you, so  you'll be out soon. Can you take 
us through what your expanded remit will encompass?  
Ms J Ross :  The expanded remit will give us the same functions  that we have in relation to asbestos  related 
diseases to deal with silica related diseases. That 's to coordinate national action.  We currently have the function of 
coordinating the Asbestos National Strategic Plan , working with the states and territories and ensuring that they 
implement actions . Likewise , we will have the functions to coordinate implementation of the silica  national 
strategic plan. The provisions in the bill closely mirror the provisions that we have in the Asbestos Safety and 
Eradication Agency Act . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   How many additional staff would you have to hire to take on that extra 
responsibility?  
Ms J Ross :  We have four additional staff . The budget measure included in additional appropriation of around 
$1 million per year for  additional staff , so we won't be a micro -agency anymore, actually , which we are 
characterised as at the moment.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You'll be renaming , I suppose.  
Ms J Ross :  We'll be renaming and we'll be classified as a small agency of 20.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   When do you assume those additional responsibilities?  
Ms J Ross :  That will be when the legislation passes the parliament.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So it c omes into effect as soon as that element of the bill passes ? 
Ms J Ross :  Yes. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So there's no delay  in implementation ? 
Ms J Ross :  No, I think those amendments come into effect  on royal assent . I could be wrong on that , but  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 117 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I think you 're right, but I was hoping you could confirm. Maybe come back to us if 
you check that and it's wrong. You can feel free to correct the record. Do you  have any additional KPIs as a 
result  assuming the bill passes.  
Ms J Ross :  No, w e haven't developed any yet. We do have an operational plan. Currently , our act requires us 
to develop an operational plan , which is then approved by the minister.  This year, hopeful that we would be 
conferred these additional functions, we requested that the minister sign off on the plan in relation to our asbestos 
functions . Then, once these functions are conferred, or if they're conferred  not wanting to pre -empt a decision of 
parliament  we will then submit a revised plan , which will have performance measures in there , because it's also 
a requirement of the act that our plan does include targets and performance measures.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Have Safe Work Australia and the government provided any previous documents or 
other materials that would assist for the quicker establishment and safety work that you will now do?  
Ms J Ross :  We've actually been liaising more with the Department of Health , who've had the carriage of 
developing the Silicosis Prevention Strategy . I think they still have the carriage of getting that approved by 
relevant ministers. We've been liaising with them and been part of their reference group , but the Lung Foundation 
has been developing that strategy. We 've been part of the reference group and provided comments on the strategy. 
We've been keen all along to see that that strategy has the same structure and the framework as the current 
Asbestos National Strategic Plan . 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Terrific.  One should never pre -empt what the parliament will do , of course  
sometimes we 're a strange beast  but one thing that I will give you some assurance on  is that  there is a chorus of 
support for this element of the bill across the board . Let's see if we can make it happen sooner rather than later. I 
thank you very much indeed for your time.  
CHAIR:   Thank you for that . Ms Ross, you are excused.  
Safe Work Australia  
[21:54]  
CHAIR:   Welcome , Safe Work Australia.  Thank you for joining us at this late hour. Would you like to make a 
short opening statement?  
Ms Baxter :  I was planning to , but g iven the lateness of the hour, could we incorporate that  into Hansard  and 
go straight to questions ? 
CHAIR:   We are fine with that.  
The statement  read as follows   
While I don't ordinarily make opening remarks, as this is my last hearing as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Safe 
Work Australia I wanted to briefly say a few words, and I thank the Committee for indulging me in this.  
To start, I'd like to say how proud I am of the achievements of Safe Work Australia during my 10 years as CEO.  
I say this not to pat myself on the back, but to put on the public record how proud I am of my Agency and the staff who 
work there.  
While we might be a small agency, we are significant in the work that we do and the impact it has, and I thank my team for 
that. 
Australia's Work Health and Safety (WHS) framework is complex, and developing public policy in this space requires a 
nuanced understanding of these issues. As an Agency, working with our Members and stakeholders, we have taken steps to 
address many significant work health and safety matters in the last 10 years.  
While there are many achievements during my time as CEO, I am particularly proud of our response to the COVID -19 
pandemic, our work to address psychosocial risk and sexual harassment, and our guidance to support gig workers  
particularly food delivery drivers.  
I am also very proud of our recent work with respect to engineered stone and tackling the issue of silicosis. I am sure this 
work in particular will be of interest to the Committee today, however as the matter is with WHS Ministers for consideration,  
it is not something I will be able to speak to in great detail.  
For all that we have achieved over the past 10 years, this is not to say workplaces are risk free. Indeed, there will always be 
risks, but I know the Agency and our Members are truly dedicated to ensuring Australians make it home safely.  
I will finish by once again thanking my staff  it has truly been a privilege to lead you and the Agency.  
CHAIR:   Senator O'Sullivan.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you for your attendance today, noting the late hour. Can you describe the 
purpose of the $1.2 million that has been provided by Safe Work Australia to social partners as part of the 
government's budget to address silicosis?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 118 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Baxter :  Safe Work Australia has not provided any funding to social partners.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   You're not familiar with social partners?  
Ms Baxter :  We are.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'm curious  to understand what 'social partners' is.  
Ms Baxter :  Certainly. Safe Work Australia is a tripartite organisation. We have representatives from each of 
the jurisdictions, including the Commonwealth. We also have two representatives representing employee 
interests , and they're  nominated by the ACTU. And we have two representatives representing the interests of 
employers, and they are A I Group and ACCI.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So they're examples of social partners?  
Ms Baxter :  That's correct.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The budget includes $1.2 million for this over the next two financial years ; is that 
right?  
Ms Baxter :  No monies of that nature were allocated to Safe Work Australia under the last budget.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay, I must have misread that. So you 're not familiar with the $1.2 million ? I just 
haven't got the actual budget line item  in front of me . 
Ms Baxter :  I am aware of the money that was allocated under the budget. My understanding is that it was 
allocated to the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So it's not funnelled through you is what you're inferring?  
Ms Baxter :  Not at all.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you know how the department came up with that figure?  
Ms Baxter :  No, I don't.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Do you know who is eligible for this funding?  
Ms Baxter :  I'm not sure. I was listening in this morning, but I think it was a different budget measure that was 
being spoken about with the department, so I couldn't say with respect to this one, I'm sorry.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   It's only if you can answer it. I'll move onto the next line then. I 'd like to ask about 
the decision that was made at the Safe Work Australia members meeting on 6 September 2023 to reduce the 
welding fumes from one milligram  per cubic metre to five milligram s per cubic metre. How did this issue come to 
be on the agenda for this decision on 6 September?  
Ms Johnston :  One of our members raised the issue with us, as they are able to do. Many members raise issues 
with us and ask for them to be put on the agenda,  and so that's how it was placed on the agenda.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   At what point was it placed on the agenda? What date? How long before 6 
September?  
Ms Johnston :  I'd have to take that on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you. Were SWA members provided advance notice of this issue and that a  
decision was to be made?  
Ms Johnston :  They were given advance notice of the item being put on the agenda.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So it just came out as part of the routine?  
Ms Johnston :  That's my recollection, but D r Newton may have a better memory. I think it was provided two 
weeks before, which is the usual standard practice of our members' papers , but Dr Newton would be able to 
confirm that for me.  
Dr Newton :  I can confirm that the agenda item was sent with the normal papers that went out two weeks prior 
to the meeting.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Can you identify what scientific evidence  report or health analysis was used to come 
to the proposed standard five times lower than the current standard?  
Dr Newton :  There are a number  of considerations that were put forward to members around international 
limits and research that was undertaken to develop those limits, but I'd have to take further detail on notice.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   If you could provide  that detail to the committee,  that would be good. What, if any, 
consultation, took place for this decision?  
Ms Johnston :  Which decision?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 119 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The decision to change the standard to be five times lower than the current standard.  
Ms Johnston :  That wasn't a decision of the agency; we just put on the agenda the issue of welding fumes and 
the reduction to the workplace exposure standard. The decision to reduce is one taken by members, but then it's a 
two-stage decision  they don't have the ultimate decision. That decision has to go to WHS ministers, and it's 
currently with WHS ministers. There's no final decision that has been made.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Have the usual processes been followed? What's happening here? Is this how any of 
these decisions are made? Or is there any deviation from that normal process?  
Ms Johnston :  There are a number  of ways that decisions can be made at members. It's not unusual that the 
decision was made this way.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Another decision was made to reduce the W ES of respirable crystalline silica from 
0.05 to 0.025. On 1 March 2023, SWA released a decision RIS managing the risks of respirable crystalline silica 
at work. On 23 March a decision was made to lower the WES. How did SWA come to this decision, given that 
the proposed WES was not considered feasible only 22 days prior?  
Ms Johnston :  SWA members made a decision to reduce the RCS WES. That decision hasn't been made final 
because it needs to go to WHS ministers, but there's going to be an interim step now. There's going to be a 
regulatory impact assessment process for RCS. At this stage, that will need to be undertaken before it's provided  
to WHS ministers for a decision.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So there will be a full regulatory impact statement?  
Ms Johnston :  That will be a decision for the Office of Impact Analysis on what we need to do in order to 
comply with their requirements. But, yes, there will be a regulatory impact assessment process undertaken.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   Is there an obligation on SWA members to base decisions on evidence?  
Ms Johnston :  There's no legal obligation in the decision -making process, but as a policy agency we try to 
encourage that all decision -making is based in best practice and evidence. In terms of the RCS WES, evidence  
was taken into account by our members. We had an independent assessment done of international and national 
evidence, which was how the RCS was based.  
Senator BROCKMAN:   So that was based on evidence  what about the welding fumes?  
Dr Newton :  They were both based on evidence.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   The other matter I have here is the diesel particulate matter and a decision made on 6 
December  or it was on the agenda  to lower the standards twice as low as what was proposed in the papers that 
you had to Senator Brockman's point.  I'm trying  to understand how decisions can be made that don't necessarily 
meet what the evidence shows . 
Ms Baxter :  Well, that's a matter for our members. The agency prepares the paper  for consideration  for our 
members at their meetings. Those papers are  informed by the evidence and best practice that we've been able to 
adduce and ascertain. Those papers are  then put to members for their consideration and ultimately their decision. 
As Ms Johnston  said, there 's nothing in our enabling legislation , the Safe Work Australia Act,  that requires 
members to make decisions only based on evidence. There are other factors that I'm sure members would take 
into consideration from time to time in arriving at their position either as a jurisdiction representative or as a 
social partner representative.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   With the diesel particulate matter , is that also a decision that the members are still  
yet to make?  
Ms Baxter :  The ministers ? 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Yes, sorry.  
Ms Baxter :  Yes, the work health and safety ministers  are yet to make a decision on that.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So that's still yet to be done. I'd like to ask you some questions about your practi ces 
for publishing your decisions. I understand agendas and details of these meetings were once published prior to 
meetings. Are they only sent to the members , or are they published? Can the public see them?  
Ms Johnston :  What documents are we referring to?  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   I'm just talking about publishing your decisions about SWA member meetings.  
Ms Baxter :  Many years ago, dating back to about 2013 when the practi ce ceased, Safe Work Australia 
members used to put out a communique after each meeting. That practi ce ceased , as I said,  in about 2013 or 
maybe 2014 , and since then there has been no embargo on members who have attended a meeting w here Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 120 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  decisions have been reached  communicating those decisions to their constituents ; to their ministers, depending on 
which membership they are ; or indeed to the public at large. There 's no prohibition. We require no prohibition.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   What do you mean by that?  
Ms Baxter :  We don't require a prohibition on communicating outcomes from the meeting.  They're not secret 
outcomes.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So you leave it up to the member to communicate it , if they want to , to their 
constituency.  
Ms Baxter :  Yes. 
Ms Johnston :  The agency also has a quarterly newsletter  that is publicly available , and w e do provide 
information on key and relevant decisions in our newsletter.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Okay. But you don't put it on a public bulletin board or anything?  
Ms Baxter :  The quarterly newsletter is on our internet site.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Does that include every decision?  
Ms Baxter :  Not necessarily every decision. As Ms Johnston just said , there are  key or major decisions . But no 
decision of Safe Work Australia is a secret decision . Indeed, if we're asked about a particular item and what the 
outcome was, we will happily provide that information to who mever has asked for it.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   But you don't know  what  you don't know,  so how would you know to inquire about  
a decision if you don't know ? Unless you were involved in it, you wouldn't know that a decision was made.  Am I 
right? I'm trying to understand the process. Clearly it's not something I'm completely across.  
Ms Baxter :  That's a reflection of the legislation that establishes Safe Work Australia and sets the membership 
of the membership body , which is broadly reflective of all aspects of society , whether it be the jurisdictional 
representatives with their constituent base, which would be quite  broad , or it be one of our social partners with 
their constituent base s. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   In terms of the agend as, they're  forwarded to the members by way of  direct 
communication . Is that righ t? 
Ms Baxter :  Yes, t hat's right.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   So you don't put that on your website . Or are they put as part of your newsletter ? 
Ms Baxter :  It's not a practice that we've indulged in, no. 
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   For the last three meetings, what was the time that elapsed between a meeting and 
when the agenda was made publicly available for that meeting ? 
Ms Baxter :  As I just indicated, we 're not in the practice of making the agenda publicly available, but our 
practice in relation to members and the agenda and papers  is that t he final agenda and the final papers go out to 
members two weeks in advance of the meeting date.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is that a requirement to do that, or is that established practice?  
Ms Baxter :  That's an established protocol that we have with our members.  
Ms Johnston :  Could I also add that the agency has a work plan and everything that 's upcoming for the next 
year is set out  on the agency work plan, so that members know what is happening in the forward year . So it's  not a 
surprise to them what 's coming up on the agenda , unless there 's an urgent or immediate matter or a member raises 
something outside of our usual cycle. There is a forward work plan, and it outlines which meeting which matter 
will be going to.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Several decisions out of the last two SW A meetings have really piqued the interest 
of parties, as there was no advance notice of them. Does SWA intend to provide a road map detailing proposed 
legislative reforms and priorities with advance notice so that businesses can adequately prepare the resources that 
would be required to respond?  
Ms Johnston :  I think there are two issues that you raise there. The first is that there was no warning of those 
two agenda items that you raised, but there was the two weeks notice that we always give with agenda items, 
which is part of our standard practice and is part of the members protocol. The second issue is, as I said, we have 
an agency work plan. We do set out the forward work plan for the agency and what is coming in the upcoming 
months. In terms of public consultation, we have extensive consultation periods when we release things for public 
consultation. We've just had an incident notification public consultation period that was open for a number of Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 121 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  months, and then we had a number of weeks extension so that people were able to provide submissions way 
beyond the closing date.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Is that work plan distributed, or is it just internal?  
Ms Johnston :  That work plan is distributed to our members. As Ms Baxter said, our membership is meant to 
come to the meetings and be representative of the ir jurisdictions and the people that the social partners represent.  
Senator O'SULLIVAN:   Thank you for that.  
CHAIR:   On behalf of the committee, it being your last hearing, Ms Baxter, I'd like to acknowledge that and 
your years of service to the Australian community. It's a difficult task. My previous life was being the head of a 
federation, so I know what it's like dealing with the states. It's a pleasurable thing sometimes, and it's challenging 
at other times. I know you've always put your heart and soul into the role, and I want to thank you very much for 
your dedication and time. You've been of service to the country.  
Ms Baxter :  Thank s very much , Chair . I would just like to say it's been an absolute privilege . It's also been a 
privilege to work with my whole team back in the agency. They do brilliant work. Read my opening statement, 
because that was where I was going to talk about how great the work of the agency has been. I really appreciate 
those comments.  
CHAIR:   Thank you.  
Coal Mining Industry (Long Service Leave Funding) Corporation  
[22:13]  
CHAIR:   I now call our last witnesses for the night, the Coal Mining Industry (Long Service Leave Funding) 
Corporation , including Ms Darlene Perks. I ask all senators that we continue our work implementing the Set the 
standard  report. As chair, I will ensure that proceedings are conducted in an orderly, respectful and courteous 
way, and I know that all senators will operate in that fashion.  I'm looking forward to your opening statement, Ms 
Perks, if you have one. Otherwise, we'll go straight to questions.  
Ms Perks :  There is no opening statement, thank you, Chair.  
CHAIR:   Senator Roberts.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you for appearing tonight. You have the last gig, as usual!  
Senator Watt:   We're saving the best for last!  
Senator ROBERTS:   At estimates on 30 May this year, right here, I asked Ms Perks for the contracts between 
Coal LSL and AUSCOAL for the years 1993 through to 2017. I was eventually provided with only three 
unredacted contracts for the years commencing 1 July 2006, 1 July 2008 and 1 July 2012. That's only three out of 
the 25 documents. Why were the rest not provided?  
Ms Perks :  The three contracts that have been provided were the documents that we have been able to access 
from the archives. The contracts were for more than a one -year term, so I don't think it's fair to say that 25 were 
missing. But it is fair to say that the three we have provided are the three that we have been able to access from 
the archives.  
Senator ROBERTS:   That's all?  
Ms Perks :  They are the three that we have been able to access.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You could only access those three?  
Ms Perks :  That's correct.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Wow! Is there any other place that you can look  any other source?  
Ms Perks :  We've exhausted our resources.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Okay, I place on record your noncompliance with the original request and your reason is  
now on record as well. Why did Coal LSL pass on the administrative responsibilities of Coal LSL to AUSCOAL?  
Ms Perks :  I can't comment on a decision of the board back in that period of time.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Do you meet with the board? Or did you meet with the board at that time? When the 
board met, were you in attendance?  
Ms Perks :  Senator, you're talking about a period which was before my employment. I think this was part of 
the discussion   
Senator ROBERTS:   That's true. Did the responsibilities that the board of Coal LSL passed on to AUSCOAL 
include collecting long service leave levies from employers?  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 122 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Ms Perks :  The contracts that have been shared with you certainly included the collection of levies as one of 
the responsibilities included in the outsourced administration contract.  
Senator ROBERTS:   When did that first happen, and over which years? Right from the start of the contract, 
was it?  
Ms Perks :  My recollection is that AUSCOAL, as a service company, were contracted by the entity from 1993.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Right from the start. It was reported in annual reports that over those years Coal LSL 
had no employees  is that true?  
Ms Perks :  That was my answer at the previous estimates.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes. So you were employed by AUSCOAL during those years?  
Ms Perks :  I answered that question at previous hearings, and the answer doesn't change.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Did you cease working for Coal LSL  I don't think we've asked this question before  
when employed by AUSCOAL? I'm guessing that would be yes.  
Ms Perks :  Coal LSL only started employing employees from 2017. Again, that was the information I 
provided in the previous hearing.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Do you know why AUSCOAL ceased providing services to Coal LSL?  
Ms Perks :  Sorry, AUSCOAL providing services to Coal LSL? Is that your question?  
Senator ROBERTS:   Yes. Why did they go to Coal LSL doing its own work?  
Ms Perks :  That was a decision by the board of Coal LSL at the time  to insource the operations.  
Senator ROBERTS:   You weren't necessarily on the board, but you were present as general manager then?  
Ms Perks :  I was not part of the board discussions.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So you weren't sitting in on the board meetings?  
Ms Perks :  Not when the decision was made.  
Senator ROBERTS:   So you were then re -employed by Coal LSL?  
Ms Perks :  Coal LSL ran a national search for the role of CEO. I applied, I was successful through that process 
and I was appointed into the role of CEO.  
Senator ROBERTS:   AUSCOAL was part  owned  50 per cent  by the CFMMEU. When was that changed 
from the original statutory   
Ms Perks :  I can't comment on the shareholding structure.  
Senator ROBERTS:   It was before your time?  
Ms Perks :  I can't comment.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Just thinking about it now, my recollection is it was quite a while ago. Do you know if 
AUSCOAL collected the levy and made a profit from holding the accumulated funds under a government 
scheme?  
Ms Perks :  I can't comment on AUSCOAL's profit and loss. I didn't have visibility of it. It wasn't part of my 
role. 
Senator ROBERTS:   The CFMMEU is one of the owners of AUSCOAL. It has a 50 per cent share?  
Ms Perks :  It's not part of my role to be concerned with the shareholding of AUSCOAL.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Do you know, though?  
Ms Perks :  I am not going to comment on that.  
Senator Watt:   Senator Roberts, I think the question   
Senator ROBERTS:   Okay. I have seen Ms Perk s's reluctance to answer.  
Senator Watt:   That's not fair. She is here, as all other witnesses are, to answer questions about the activities 
of the organisation she is representing, not provide information about shareholdings in companies external to the 
organisation.  
Senator ROBERTS:   I was going to ask which entities made a profit from this arrangement based on moneys 
paid by the coal companies, but it's outside your purview. Minister Watt, I don't know if you would know the 
answer to this, but it is not a question for Ms Perks. Is it true that 2011 legislation under the auspices of Bill 
shorten enabled casuals to be covered by Coal LSL arrangements? They actually changed the Coal LSL 
legislation, I understand, even though casuals are not covered under the black coal award.  Wednesday, 25 October 2023  Senate  Page 123 
 
EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT LEGISLATION COMMITTEE  Senator Watt:   I don't know the answer to that. That is talking about events from four or five Prime Ministers 
ago. 
Senator ROBERTS:   That's correct, b ut it's affecting miners right now. Prior to that, there was no way that 
someone who was a casual could be on Coal LSL.  
Senator Watt:   I don't know the answer to that question.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Bill Shorten's legislation, I understand  I was hoping for confirmation  opened the 
door for that.  
Ms Perks :  The change of legislation in 2011 did change the eligibility rules under the scheme, and the 
eligibility rules that are still current under section 4 of the admin act talk about the duties of the employee. That is 
the explanation I've provided in several hearings  that the eligibility rules do not refer to the employment 
relationships and industrial relations of the employee. So, yes, they were the changes in 2011 that were 
implemented as part of the administration act amendment.  
Senator ROBERTS:   Thank you.  
CHAIR:   Thanks very much. As there are no further questions , that concludes today's hearing. Thank you to 
all witnesses who appeared and to Hansard and Broadcasting for their assistance and their mighty great work as 
per usual. I remind senators that written questions on notice should be received from senators by close of business 
on Wednesday 8 November 2023. Answers to questions on notice will be required to be returned by close of 
business on Friday 15 December 2023.  
Committee adjourned at 22:23  